
I have reviewed your H&P and am extremely impressed by its many strengths. I have a few constructive suggestions
that I will intersperse among my notations of the strengths of what you wrote:
1. I commend you for giving the reliability of the informant.
2. It is useful to include the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself. This often has an
impact on the differential diagnosis.
3. HIV patients present special problems in constructing the HPI, because so many systems can be affected by the
virus. I think you have done a very creditable job of determining what should be included in this HPI, without
making it too detailed. I commend you for the way you constructed this HPI.
4. Although "AMS" is pretty well known for what it means, it might have been a little better to spell it out the first time you
use it. The JCAHO, which accredits hospitals, is very strict about the use of abbreviations, requiring hospitals to have a
list of "approved" abbreviations used in the hospital's records.
5. It would have been more complete to indicate how the infection of the earlier admission was treated.
6. In the PMH, there is no need to repeat what has already been stated elsewhere. Just say "In addition to HPI..."
7. I'm a little surprised that the prophylactic dose of Bactrim is so high. Often it is only given three times a week. Bactrim
at that dose indefinitely can itself cause thrombocytopenia from folic acid deficiency. The preventive for this is actually not
folic acid (which micro-organisms can use) but folinic acid, which only mammals can use. Of course, this has nothing to do
with your write-up, but I didn't want to miss the opportunity to inform you of this..
8. I commend you for giving the type of adverse reaction to penicillin -- which may not have been an actual
allergy, but definitely needed to be mentioned.
9. Sometimes it is good to specify the risk behavior that caused the patient to become infected with HIV.
10. It would have been more complete to indicate the father's age, and to mention children or if there are no children in the
family history.
11. Some of the items in your Review of Systems are actually physical findings and should not be in the ROS, which is
history, not physical exam.
12. It is a good practice to describe the heart rhythm together with the rate in the vitals.
13. I commend you for noting that the patient appears older than his stated age. This is a very important
observation of the impact of illness on him.
14. The scars were probably in the antecubital area, not the cubital area. If they looked like injection track marks, you can
say so.
15. In describing scars, you can state whether they appear to be well-healed.
16. Your assessment and plan are EXCELLENT: well thought out and focused, complete and yet fairly succinct.
17. In the Plan it might have been a good idea to indicate work-up for vitamin deficiencies that could contribute to the
thrombocytpenia.
18. The EBM is wonderful and reflects true scholarship.
I am so pleased with this write-up and especially because it is your first and yet it is so very good. Most of
the comments above are about style and not substance. I am eager to see your next write-up. If you can stay a few
minutes after tomorrow's Clinical Challenge session, we can discuss the write-up in real time if you wish.
Have a tranquil evening.
Bruce Fisher, PGY-51
