History and Physical Examination

Date: 5/2/2021
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Chief complaint: Left nasal pain and drainage and hematuria. 
History of Present Illness:
Patient is a 25-year-old female with medical history significant for mixed connective tissue disease
(diagnosed 3/21/21) and recent nasal septoplasty (3/12/21) presenting to the ED with three days of 
nasal pain and clear nasal discharge as well as five days of hematuria. Patient says that following her 
nasal septoplasty she had one week for swelling, erythema, and pain, which resolved at the conclusion 
of the week. Since then she noticed that she was having increasing knee pain in her right knee as well as 
diffuse pain in her left wrist. She then visited a rheumatologist who diagnosed her with mixed 
connective tissue disorder and started her on hydroxychloroquine. She reports that her knee and wrist 
pain began to resolve when she noticed that her urine was a dark red/brown color. Thinking that she 
may just be dehydrated, AL increased her water intake and continued with her life until 4/30 when she 
began to have extreme pain in her nasal septum accompanied by continuous clear discharge. In the ED, 
labs were drawn and the patients CMP and CBC were unremarkable and a urinalysis showed 3+ protein, 
3+ Blood, with negative leukocyte esterase or nitrates. Patient does not report fever, chills, 
dizziness/lightheadedness, headache, blurry vision, or weakness, numbness, or tingling of the face or 
extremities. She does not report weight loss or bowel/bladder changes. 
Past Medical History:
As reported in HPI
Past Surgical History:
Breast augmentation
-2019
Otherwise unremarkable besides what is laid out in HPI
Medications:
Hydroxychloroquine 400mg PO once daily with dinner.
Family History:
Mother: Age 59. HTN and HLD
Father: Not known to patient
No siblings
No family history immune disorders, cancer, arthritis, or blood disorders. 
Social History
Does not smoke cigarettes 
Drinks alcohol socially. Approximately 2-1 drinks per week
Does not use illicit drugs
Works in HR for Comcast
Housing situation is secure
No food insecurities
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: See HPI
HEENT: denies headache, ear pain, tinnitus, blurry vision
Cardiovascular: She does not report chest pain, palpitations, DOE, LE edema
Respiratory: She does not report SOB, coughing, wheezing
Gastrointestinal: See HPI
Genitourinary: See HPI
MSK: See HPI
Skin: Patient does not report rashes, petechiae, purpura, bumps, or bruises. 
Psych: Denies depression, anxiety, SI/HI
Physical Exam:. 
Vitals: Temp 98.5 (oral), HR 72 and regular rhythm, BP 117/73, RR 17 and not labored, SPO2 98% on 
room air
General: Well appearing female of stated age in mild distress
Skin: Normal appearing with no discoloration
HEENT: Normocephalic and atraumatic. Pupils equally round and reactive to light. Tenderness around 
the left nasolabial fold and nasal septal area. Bilateral friable nasal mucosa. No erythema, post nasal 
drainage, or discoloration of the throat. 
Neck: No cervical lymphadenopathy. No palpable masses. Trachea midline.
Pulm: Lungs are clear to auscultation. No crackles/rales/wheezes/rhonci. Bilateral resonance to 
percussion. Normal tactile fremitus. 
Cardiac: Regular rate and rhythm, normal S1 and S2. No rubs, murmurs, or gallops.
GI: Abdomen is nontender, nondistended, no palpable masses, and bowel sounds are present in all four 
quadrants and are normal. No hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.
Extremities: There is no edema. 5/5 strength in Bilateral upper and lower extremities. Reflexes 2+ 
bilaterally in Upper and lower extremities. 
Neuro: Alert and oriented x3. Sensation to light touch and pinprick is intact. Sensation to vibration and 
proprioception is intact. 
Psych: Normal affect. Very kind and in good spirits. Cooperative but is also clearly anxious. 
Labs & Imaging:
Na: 136, K: 3.6, Cl: 100, HCO3: 22.7, BUN 18, Cr: 0.9, Ca: 9.0, Mg: 1.8 
WBC: 9.4 / Hb: 10.3 / Hct: 31.2 / Plt: 323 
-Diff: N: 65.3% L: 28.3% Mo: 5.0.% Eo: 1.0% Baso: 0.4%
Microbiology: 
Culture of Aspirate/Abscess which showed few Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A)
CT Facial Bones W/Contrast: 
Rim-enhancing low-attenuation involving the cartilaginous nasal septum measuring 18 x 7 x 15 mm likely 
due to an abscess.
Renal US Bilateral: Normal renal ultrasound.
Assessment
A/P: Patient is a 25 y/o female with ANA+ mixed connective tissue disorder (diagnosed 3/21) presenting 
with nasal abscess following nasal septoplasty on 3/12/21. Culture was + GAS and patient was started on 
Ampicillin-Sulbactam 3g IV. Failure to improve resulted in patient being started on Vancomycin 1g 
piggyback every 12 hrs. Patient was also reports that she has hematuria for the past five day and 
urinalysis showed 3+ blood and 3+ protein.
1. Nasal Abscess
This patient is suffering from GAS+ nasal abscess likely resulting from her recent septoplasty on 3/12. 
However, given the patients history and location of the abscess, other etiologies should be considered. 
For a patient with autoimmune disorder such as mixed connective tissue disease, we should rule out 
immunodeficiency from autoimmunity. Additionally, though her culture was positive for GAS, the 
abscess has not responded to ampicillin sulbactam. This information, plus the location of the abscess 
raises concern for possible coinfection with Staph Aureus. Also given her history, we should consider the 
possibility of granulomatosis with polyangitis which can affect the nasal septum as well as the kidneys.
2. Hematuria and proteinuria
Patient presented with 3+ blood and 3+ proteinuria. This is likely caused by the lupus component of 
mixed connective tissue disease which affects the kidneys. As listed above, we should also consider 
granulomatosis with polyangitis as a possibility. Additionally, this patient could have RPGN due to her 
acute onset of hematuria and proteinuria coupled with her autoimmune history. 
Plan:
1. Nasal abscess
Patient should be scheduled for incision and drainage of the abscess. We should continue the ampicillinsulbactam for the full 14-day course. In addition, we should add vancomycin, 1g IV piggyback to cover 
possible coinfection with Staph given her resistance to antibiotics so far. We should also order fungal 
cultures on the abscess aspirate. 
2. Hematuria and proteinuria. 
Patient was found to have 3+ blood and 3+ protein on urinalysis. 24-hour urine protein collection should 
be ordered. In addition, we should order a renal ultrasound to assess for cysts, structural abnormalities, 
and stones. I would also like to order a P-ANCA and C-ANCA to assess for autoimmune vasculitis which 
could be affecting her kidney function. Depending on the results of this testing, I would like to consider a 
renal biopsy to assess the extent of kidney damage in this patient. 
