
Pt is a reliable historian who speaks English well as a second language. A translator was not 
used. Her daughter was present and helped with recall and some translation.
CC: worsening shortness of breath x 2 months
HPI: 61F with presents with a 2-week history of progressively worsening shortness of breath, 
lower extremity swelling, and dry cough, as well as a "few day" history of pain in her chest. Pt.
was previously short of breath with walking but is now short of breath at rest. She reports new 2-
pillow orthopnea, and last night experienced PNDs for the first time. She has gained 15 lbs in 
the last 2 weeks, which she attributes to water weight. She also reports mild, 2/10 chest pain 
best described as a ―tightness‖ that does not radiate. It has increased in frequency in the last 2 
weeks. It was constant last night for the first time, but she still rates it at a 2/10. This chest pain 
has never been worse with exertion. She notes that this pain is different from her NSTEMI, 
which was a more intense, crushing pain throughout her chest. She also reports abdominal 
distention and nausea but reports no abdominal pain. Her cough is dry and she reports some 
wheezes. She reports no sick contacts. She reports that she has been taking her medication as 
prescribed. Denies any recent changes in diet, including recent salty foods.
She believes this began when her cardiologist switched her from lisinopril to Entresto two weeks 
ago. She called her cardiologist on two days prior to presentation, who recommended she stop 
taking Entresto and restart the lisinopril tomorrow (three days after stopping the medication), 
and follow up at her primary care provider at that time for basic labwork. Because of her 
worsening SOB and chest pain last night, her daughter called her an ambulance this morning.
She reports that she was given aspirin in the ambulance.
In the ED today she was given 40 mg Lasix and has urinated, with no dysuria, hematuria, 
incontinence, or difficulty voiding completely. 
ROS: as per HPI
Constitutional: reports fever (never measured) and chills. Denies changes in appetite, fatigue, or 
feelings of weakness.
HEENT: no headaches, changes in vision or hearing
Pulm: as per HPI
Cardio: as per PHI
GI: reports nausea and a few days of constipation in the past 2 weeks, but is having bowel 
movements again. Denies vomiting, hematemesis, hematochezia, melena
GU: no dysuria, hematuria, changes in urinary frequency
Derm: no rashes, bruising, petechiae
Psych: no changes in mood
PMH:
Type-I diabetes: diagnosed at age 6. Was "perfectly controlled" until her age 35-40.
Hyperlipidemia: diagnosed ~2015, on losartan.
Hypothyroidism: diagnosed 1990, managed with levothyroxine
Heart failure: diagnosed ~2016. Last echocardiogram 04/2019 in context of NSTEMI and PCI, 
EF found to be 25%.
Document1 10/10/19
PSH:
- CABG
- Multiple PCI
- C-section x 2
- R toe amputation
Home Medications: Walmart Pharmacy, Rt 18, Woodbridge (732) 955-0770
metoPROlol Extended Release 25 mg by mouth daily
Enoxaparin Injection 40 mg subcutaneous daily at 10 pm
Insulin Glargine r-DNA (Lantus) 54 units subcutaneous nightly at bedtime
Insulin Lispro (HumaLOG) 12 units subcutaneous Three Times a day before Meals
Insulin Lispro (HumaLOG) Sliding Scale. subcutaneous Three Times a day before Meals
Senna tablet ( 1 tablet= 8.6 mg Senna) 1 tab by mouth nightly at bedtime
Atorvastatin 80 mg by mouth daily at 10 pm
Clopidogrel 75 mg by mouth daily
Isosorbide Dinitrate 30 mg by mouth daily
Levothyroxine 100 mcg by mouth daily at 7 am
Lisinopril 10 mg by mouth daily
Spironolactone 25 mg by mouth daily
Plavix 75 mg by mouth daily
Allergies:
- Vancomycin, reaction is rash
- Zosyn, reaction is rash
FH: not elicited
SH:
- Lives at home with her daughter and son. Divorced happily in 2015. Denies food or housing 
insecurity.
- Denies alcohol use, tobacco, or other drug use.
Vitals:
T: 97.2 Tmax: 97.2 @ 01 Jun 17:32
HR: 78 (78 - 94)
BP: 171/78 (140/60 - 171/78)
RR: 20 (20 - 22) | SpO2: 98% (98% - 100%) on 2L NC. SpO2 on RA was not assessed.
Physical Exam:
General: Lying comfortably in bed, in no acute distress.
HEENT: Moist mucous membranes.
Neck: ~13 cm JVP, trachea midline
Heart: Systolic murmur RRR, normal S1, S2.
Lungs: Decreased breath sounds bilaterally, with no crackles or wheezes.
Abdomen: Distended. Soft, nontender, no organomegaly.
Extremities: Bilateral 2+ lower extremity dependent edema. Legs were tender to deep palpation. 
No cyanosis, or clubbing.
Skin: No rashes.
Neuro: Answers all questions appropriately.
Psych: normal affect and though process.
Document1 10/10/19
.:
.: Labs:
LABS (last 24h)
135 | 105 | 22
--------------------< 211 Ca: 6.9 Mg: 1.6 [06/01 @ 08:39]
4.9 | 17.9 | 0.8
WBC: 11.3 / Hb: 11.3 / Hct: 32.7 / Plt: 250 [06/01 @ 08:39]
-- Diff: N:85.1% L:9.8% Mo:4.4% Eo:0.2% Baso:0.4%
Troponin T: <0.01 [06/01 @ 08:39]
2021-06-01 14:39 Troponin T: 0.02* ng/mL
2021-06-01 12:30 ProBNP: 2590* pg/mL
Imaging:
06/01/2021 09:05 Chest 1 View- Pulmonary vascular congestion and right basilar 
opacity/pleural effusion. Enlarged cardiac silhouette. Findings suggest CHF.
EKG:
Normal sinus rhythm. T-wave changes in leads V-I through V-III that are different from abnormal 
T-waves in EKG from most recent EKG in 04/2019.
Assessment/Plan: 61F with PMH of CHF and CAD s/p CABG and multiple PCI including 
NSTEMI in 2019 requiring PCI presents with a 14-day history of progressively worsening SOB, 
cough, LE edema, PE findings of decreased breath sounds and elevated JVP, labs showing 
normal troponin and consistently elevated proBNP, and T-wave changes on EKG all suggestive 
of decompensated heart failure, etiology of decompensation currently unknown. 
#Decompensated heart failure 2/2 EKG changes
- Most likely etiology of decompensated heart failure is likely ischemic damage given her EKG 
changes and history of NSTEMI requiring PCI.
- Differential includes:
- Changes in medication regimen, unlikely given known efficacy of Entresto and 
similarity to lisinopril
- Medication non-compliance is one of the most common causes of HF decompensation. 
Unlikely given her good medication recall, including a long list and most dosages.
- High-salt diet. Possible, but pt. denies any recent changes in diet and cooks for herself 
avoiding processed foods.
- Depression is a possible CHF contributor
- Plan:
- Continue Lasix, 40 mg twice daily for diuresis until clinically stable for discharge with no 
SOB or PE findings.
- Consult cardiology for EKG changes and chest pain for catheterization and possible 
PCI.
- Order echocardiogram, as last done in 04/2019. Check outpatient records for more 
recent imaging.
#HTN
- Pt reports HTN is well controlled with a systolic BP of 150 as the highest at-home 
measurement in the last few months, checked ~weekly.
Document1 10/10/19
#DM-I
- Currently well-controlled with insulin regimine. Most recent HbA1c 9.1, but down from previous 
readings of over 11. Pt reports that her sugars were "perfectly" controlled from her diagnosis 
until age 35-40, when she began to have rising blood glucose readings.
- Continue insulin regimen in hospital, encouraging compliance and diet for continue 
improvement in HbA1c.
#HLD: continue home medications
#Hyperthyroidism
- Consider thyroid studies (TSH, free T3, T4) as hyperthyroidism may be a cause of 
hypertension and decompensation of heart failure. Pt. reports having studies done one month 
ago. Will reach out to PCP for baseline. 
Unfortunately, my primary question for this patient seems to have an answer that is unsupported 
by the literature:
Do patients need to undergo the 36-hour washout period when switching from an ACEinhibitor such as lisinopril to Entresto?
This patient believed that her decompensation started after stopping her existing hypertensive 
medication (lisinopril) in order to swtich to Entresto. Regardless of how accurate this belief is, it 
should impact patient care because she told us she would never take Entresto again. The 
leading cause of decompensated heart failure is medication non-compliance, so this alone 
should encourage us to consider returning her to lisinopril while also working with her to 
understand the reasons for this switch.
Entresto is a well-studied medication (1) with benefit to patients on existing medications, 
including specifically ACE inhibitors. The change made by her cardiologist is well-supported, 
and the PICO for these studies in fact fits our patient well:
P: Patients with diagnosed CHF
I: Switching to an ACE-inhibitor
C: Remaining on enalapril
O: 0.8 hazard reduction for composite death or hospitalization due to heart failure 
These results are convincing, enough to end the trial early, but the data behind the washout 
period is lacking.
The manufacturer’s insert (2), one of only two publications cited in a recommendation published 
by the American Academy of Family Physicians (3), contains no citations of any kind beyond the 
clinical trials proving efficacy. Indeed, even the updated guidelines from the combined American 
College of Cardiology, American Heart Association, and the Heart Failure Society of American 
(4) provide no citation for the recommendation of a 36-hour washout period used in this clinical 
trial.
The only citation I was able to find for this washout period were for Omaparilat, a combined 
ACE-I and neprilysin-inhibitor that never made it to market due to increased risk for 
angioedema. Two trials for Omaparilat, known as OCTAVE and OVERATURE (5,6), were a 
direct comparison to enalapril, similar to the defining PARADIGM-HF study for Entresto (1). 
Document1 10/10/19
OVERTURE found an increased risk in angioedema, while OCTAVE did not (7). It is unclear to 
me if the Omaparilat studies included a 36-hour washout period, or if they are sufficient to 
explain the apparently confidence in this uncited 36-hour timeframe. 
Interestingly, though perhaps unfortunately unsurprisingly, the switch from enalapril to Enstresto 
is not without controversy (8). Though efficacy was the primary outcome for the PARADIGM-HF 
study for Entresto, there was a notable increase in the rate of angioedema (the primary risk 
avoided by the 36-hour washout period) in the black population between Entresto and enalapril:
Overall, 5 of the 213 black patients (2.3%) taking sacubitril/valsartan compared 
with 1 of the 214 black patients (0.5%) taking enalapril experienced angioedema; 
1 of the patients in the sacubitril/valsartan group required subsequent 
hospitalization. Assessing specifically the US black population in PARADIGMHF, 3 of the 54 patients (5.6%) treated with sacubitril/valsartan experienced 
angioedema, compared with none in the enalapril group.
This is a concerning finding with multiple implications, including the importance of so-called 
―phase 4‖ clinical trials with population-wide data sets. Specific to this patient, it is possible that 
her Hispanic background makes her under-represented in the very same PARADIGM-HF study.
Of course, this patient’s presentation of decompensated heart failure is different from the 
concern of angioedema discussed so far. Specific to our patient, I am concerned that this 36-
hour washout period was extended out of a reasonable over-abundance of caution for potential 
drug interactions between ACE-I and Entresto, as well intentioned yet poorly supported as these 
concerns may be. Though the prescribing physician in this case was well-served by the 
guidelines and overall population data, it is possible this patient’s wash-out period was too long
per her ―a few days‖ history of washout. Over-abundance may be an understatement, as one 
study found that the recommended slow dosage increase for Entresto may be unnecessary (9), 
and that most patients tolerated only a 2-week step-up period well, shorter than what is often 
recommended (4). This may have contributed to the decompensation of her already poorly 
controlled, though sub-acute, CHF.
Of course, it remains entirely possible and in fact probable that her medication switch was not 
the cause of her presentation to the ED. Despite this, I am comfortable with my conclusion that 
the 36-hour washout period is widely cited but poorly supported by the literature. 
.548