
You submitted this write-up on a Monday! That is unprecedented for me! Wow!
I have read the H&P and have my usual comments:
1. It is excellent that you included the reason not to use the patient as an informant. It would have been a little more
complete to indicate the degree of reliability of the daughter as an informant.
2. It is excellent that you included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. This is one instance where the HPI and the history of the chief complaint almost coincide completely. The one thing I
might suggest to be added to the HPI would be the symptoms that led to the aortic valve replacement, since chest pain is
among the criteria for that. You would start with her status at the onset of those symptoms, and how she fared in the years
after the surgery until the current episode. But your construction of the history of the recent events is excellent.
4. In the HPI, you mention shortness of breath. This should be quantified if at all possible: Is it related to exertion and if
so how much exertion brings it on. It this a change from baseline?
5. You mention that the pain is not "accompanied by" swallowing. Did you mean it does not accompany swallowing or is
not caused by swallowing?
6. In describing the EKG changes, it would be more informative to describe the T wave changes in more detail.
7. In the PSH, the aortic valve disease and treatment can't be separated from the HPI. If calcified, it probably was
stenotic and some patients understand that the opening became too small.
8. In the Family History, it is important to include parents if possible, and the ages of individuals mentioned.
9. With immigrants to the US, it is often useful to include when they came to this country.
10. It would be useful to describe the extent to which respiration was labored, if at all.
11. I am thrilled that you percussed the chest!!!!!!...and that you looked for accessory muscle use.
12. Was there any area of tenderness of the chest wall?
13. Please try to be more quantitative in describing the location of the PMI and the liver size.
14. In this patient it would have been appropriate to describe whether there were any deformities of the joints of the
hands, as she has a history of RA.
15. I was a little surprised that glucose was not among the lab data.
16. A suspicion of pulmonary embolism is raised by the relatively low oxygen saturation. The Wells score certainly was
important, so brava to you for including it.
17. I wonder if serial troponin measurements would have been useful. Otherwise your Assessment and Plan were
superb.
18. Your EBM is outstandingly selected and rendered.
you are showing really good growth from write-up to write-up and I am eager to see your fifth effort. And I am
grateful that you are so prompt about submitting them. I have never had a student as prompt as you are with this.
Have a great week and I look forward to reviewing the OSCE videos with you on Wednesday after the Clinical Challenge
session.
