
With delight I must tell you that this current write-up shows tremendous growth in comparison with the first one,
which itself was excellent. As you have come to expect from me, I have several comments, most of them to reinforce the
good practices you have applied to this write-up and a few intended for your further growth.
1. It is commendable that you indicated the informant and the reliability of the informant right up front.
2. It is useful and desirable to include the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself.
3. It is a very good practice to give the patient's "usual state of health" at the onset of the HPI, as you did; but it
would be more informative also to include what that state of health is (e.g., "apparent good health" or "failing health
from...")
4. Many people, as you have done, use the word "substernal"; but it is ambiguous. It can mean behind the sternum or
under the sternum or below the sternum. If you mean behind the sternum, a clearer way to express this is to say
"retrosternal".
5. It is excellent that you expressed quantitation of the weight gain.
6. It is excellent that you quantified her exercise tolerance.
7. Because of the overall story, one symptom to mention, whether present or absent, is paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
This symptom has great differential diagnostic significance, which we can discuss in real time if you wish.
8. (I have to tease you about this: 1300 as a time of day is 1:00 pm and so it seems odd to speak of it as "1300 last
night".
9. Ideally, if you use the moment of admission as the point of reference for all events in the history, instead of saying
"ago" or "last night" you would say "...prior to admission (PTA)" or "the night prior to admission". That way, no matter when
the document is reviewed, the reader can easily reconstruct the chronology of events clearly and accurately.
10. It seems extraordinary that a patient would know a term such as "hepatic congestion" as you indicated at the end of
the second paragraph.
11. I commend you for referring the reader to the HPI in the ROS instead of repeating the symptoms.
12. With that in mind, several items that you mention in the PMH can be omitted, since you very properly included them in
the HPI. I don't believe that you included the mitral regurgitation or the AICD in the HPI and these should have been
included in it also. Indeed, it isn't clear to me how she warranted an AICD, from what you gave in the history, unless she
once had a much worse ejection fraction.
13. In the PSH, you didn't have to repeat the PCI or mastectomy, as you mentioned them earlier in the appropriate
sections of the write-up.
14. I am delighted that you indicated the types of reactions that she experienced under "allergies". But nausea
from morphine is not an allergy; it is intolerance or adverse side effect, but not an allergy. You could simply say, in a
separate section (e.g., "other adverse effects"). This is important because true allergy might deter you from using a
congener of a drug that had caused an allergic reaction. But for an adverse effect or intolerance you might be able to use
a congener safely, as long as you warn the patient.
15. In the Family History, it would be more complete to include the ages of those people mentioned and whether they are
alive.
16. Possibly, the smoking history (although absent) should have been mentioned in the HPI, as it is a risk factor for what
she actually has.
17. In the Vitals, many people (including me) think that the rhythm should be stated right after the heart rate.
18. I commend you for indicating the angle at which she was reclining when you looked at the neck veins; but I
think that you meant to say "45 degrees" and not "45%".
19. In the chest exam, did you note the absence of the breast? (I will tell you a story about that from when I was a
sophomore student, if you remind me when we talk in real time.)
20. In describing the rhythm under "Cardiac" unless you saw regular a waves and v waves in the neck, you can't really
say it is a "sinus tachycardia". All you can say is that the rhythm was regular. This is not just nit-picking. I will tell you why
if you remind me when we talk.
21. Your summary statement in introducing the assessment and plan is excellent; but I think that you may also want
to mention possible dietary salt indiscretion in the differential diagnosis.
22. I have already mentioned the differential diagnostic importance of the presence or absence of paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea. If that was absent, and the CXR didn't show signs of congestive failure, it's hard to make a case for significant
congestive failure in this event.
23. I commend you for wanting to get a transthoracic echocardiogram. That would be critical to determining what
is going on. Sometimes those are even done in the ER.
24. It is hard to make a case for significant pulmonary embolism with an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air.
4/8/2021 Re: H&P #2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
25. Your insistence that she have CPAP in the hospital reflects excellent insight. If she needs it at home, how
could she not need it in the hospital?
26. Your inclusion of "adequate social support" in your discussion is a wonderful reflection of your clinical
acumen and humanism.
27. It's hard for me to agree that she has chronic iron deficiency anemia (if that is what IDA means) if the MCV is 85.
28. Your EBM is very interesting, even if quite an old paper. It is important to be familiar with classic medical
literature. But it would be interesting to see what more current articles recommend with regard to optimal management of
congestive heart failure. (Although I grew up with cardiac glycosides as the cornerstone of therapy of CHF, I think things
have changed quite a bit in the last several decades.)
it sounds like I am being very critical of this really excellent write-up, but most of what I say above is intended to
add polish to your work, and not to address substance. Your clinical sense is truly very good, based on this write-up
(as well as the first one). In essence, I am encouraging you to go from strength to strength, to cite an old saying.
I have no doubt that, as you move forward, you will indeed go from strength to strength and take your rightful
place among the true exemplars of our profession.
I will send you a text very soon to try to arrange a phone call/FaceTime in real time.
