
Having read your second H&P, I offer the following comments. You will note that most of them are laudatory affirmations of
what you have written!
1. It is excellent that you indicate the informant and the informant's reliability right up front.
2. It is excellent that you state clearly the duration of the chief complaint with the chief complaint itself.
3. Although it is not always necessary to indicate past maladies, what you have included in the introductory sentence of
your HPI is all relevant to the HPI and definitely belongs where you put it. Ordinarily I would want you to put these in
chronologically, but I don't think, in this instance, it would have added value to what you wrote to have done that. And so I
commend you for having the insight to set the stage for the HPI in this manner. If anything, it might have been a little more
informative to indicate when she first began to use alcohol and to try to approximate the quantity she consumed and with
what regularity (daily, weekly...)
4. Sometimes it is useful to include C.A.G.E. criteria but in this instance I don't think there is any question about the
seriousness of this patient's alcohol use.
5. In some instances it is useful to ask about changes in weight. If it is this patient's practice to monitor her weight, then
it would be of use to record something quantitative about her weight at some point. It appears, from what you wrote, that
she seeks care when she can't tolerate the discomfort from abdominal distention from ascites.
6. It is excellent that you added the sentence about the paracentesis in the ED. It would be more complete if you could
have included a description of the fluid in addition to its color (e.g., was it cloudy or bloody).
7. One could argue that what you included in the PMH are really integral parts of the HPI and might be included in their
chronological place in the HPI. It would have been appropriate to go into more detail about her opioid use if it were
possible to get information about it. But given her distress when you saw her, this may not have been practical.
8. Before I go any further, I want to commend you for avoiding my buzz words "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in
her reporting of symtoms.
9. In the ROS, when there is diarrhea, it is useful to describe the stools. The features to ask about are color,
consistency, frequency, and volume. This information may have great differential diagnostic significance. (By the way,
peritoneal inflammation itself may cause diarrhea in some patients.) Of course, she is taking a medicine (lactulose) which
has a notorious side effect of diarrhea.
10. I am very pleased that you described the heart rhythm right up front with the heart rate in the vitals.
11. Sometimes, in good daylight, it is possible to distinguish the color of jaundice. Hepatocellular jaundice is classically
orange, hemolytic jaundice is generally yellow, and obstructive jaundice often has a green tinge. You need very good light,
and most indoor hospital lighting does not enable this distinction, unless the bilirubin is quite high, usually over 7 or 8.
12. (I have to do this: Mucus is a noun, and mucous is the adjective that use used in "mucous membranes.")
13. I acknowledge that the patient was very, very uncomfortable. But it would have been more informative if you could
have gently elicited a fluid wave and, if she could move around a little in the bed, shifting dullness. With this much ascites,
finding the liver may be very difficult. The technique that is used is called ballottement, where you bounce a deep viscus
against your hand and see if it bounces back. (This is also done with the patella to detect articular or periarticular fluid in
the knee, and sometimes it is done with the uterus.) But it is possible that this patient's discomfort would have made her
unable to tolerate ballottement.
14. I am pleased that you noted the peripheral edema. I'd bet she had some near her sacrum also. (This is almost
certainly related to her low albumin.)
15. I am pleased that you noted the asterixis. To elicit it best, it is best to have the patient hold the hands vertical, as close
as possible at a right angle with the forearm, with the fingers spread out. You will pick it up that way in patients who may
not have visible tremors with complete rest of the upper extremities.
16. Whenever a patient is anemic, it is more complete to include the MCV and the RDW with the data from the CBC.
17. In this patient, the real indications that she has impaired liver function are: the asterixis (encephalopathy from inability
to detoxify), the low albumin and elevated INR (impaired synthesis) and the elevated bilirubin (impaired excretion). The
transaminases are the least important indicators for her and are not really measures of liver function, just, to a certain
extent, hepatocyte status.
18. In your assessment, which is wonderfully succinct, I would say that the abdominal pain is concerning for peritonitis,
sheer volume of ascites, and maybe pancreatitis. Liver failure itself is not painful and isn't really part of the differential
diagnosis, of itself, of the pain. But the summary statement in the assessment is excellent for what it includes, for its
thoughtfulness, and for its succinctness.
19. In evaluating the ascites fluid, one test to include, to me, that may have immediate implications, is a gram stain. If it
shows organisms, that can very much guide initial therapy.
20. Your discussion of the cirrhosis and encephalopathy is excellent and I am especially pleased with your inclusion of the
MELD score. This patient has reached the point at which transplantation is her only hope--if she meets certain other
9/23/21, 12:01 PM Re: H&P 2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
criteria (such as abstinence).
21. At some point it would be a good idea to image her liver, since in some patients cirrhosis is a precursor to a
hepatocellular carcinoma.
22. It is very likely that the hyponatremia is dilutional, in part related to her hypoalbuminemia. The ascites is not causing
the hyponatremia, but is likely due in part to the low albumin and, probably to a greater extent, to the portal hypertension
caused by the severity of her cirrhosis.
23. TJ, I am so very pleased that you considered the implications of lapse in her health insurance coverage.
Unfortunately, in this country, it is a major social determinant of poor health. I am thrilled that you want to involve a social
worker in the management of this patient.
24. I am extremely pleased with your EBM paragraphs, which reflect thoughtfulness and good scholarship.
your initial H&P was very good and this one shows excellent growth from that very strong starting point. I am very
pleased with your work and look forward to further interactions with you.
Respectfully,
