
Patient appears to be a reliable narrator
CC: right sided pain x 4 days
HPI: 46M who presents to the emergency room with a 4-day history of right-sided flank pain.
Pain began 4 days prior to presentation with no clear precipitating event, no recent trauma or 
inciting movement or strain. It has slowly been building since then. He currently rates it at 8/10. 
He describes it as a constant and sharp, shooting pain. He points to the sources of his pain as 
on his back, midway between his costal margin and hip, and two thirds of the way laterally. Last 
night, he could not sleep because of the pain, causing him to come to the ED this morning. The 
pain is worse when he takes a deep breath, when it will radiate to his front. He has not taken 
anything for the pain, but was give 1000 mg Tylenol in the ED, which reduced his pain to a 7/10. 
He has never felt this pain before. He has never had a kidney stone before. Pt. reports no 
associated symptoms, besides fatigue from lack of sleep. 
This patient reports a history of chronic kidney disease, which he reports being told is due to 
poorly controlled hypertension. He was diagnosed with hypertension in ~2010. In ~2016, he was 
diagnosed with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and heart disease, based on results from routine 
bloodwork. He cannot specify the type of heart disease. He does not currently have a primary 
care physician but does see a nephrologist regularly. It is unclear who made these diagnoses
originally. He says that his heart and kidney disease are the result of not taking his hypertension 
medication. Since his diagnosis with CKD, he has been taking his blood pressure medication 
regularly, and though he can report some but not all the names and no dosages of his 
medication (carvedilol, hydralazine, a water pill, and some others), he can report at what time of 
day he takes different medications. He does not take his blood pressures at home, but says that 
since he began taking his medication reliably (exact timeframe unclear), when he is in the office,
they have been in the 130’s.
He reports being hospitalized recently for complications of these conditions. About three weeks 
ago, he noticed swelling in his legs and that he was getting short of breath. He was admitted for 
water pills and told to follow up with his nephrologist outpatient to begin hemodialysis. Though 
he has followed up with his nephrologist, he has never received dialysis. He reports receiving 
one shot of Epoetin, to which he had a reaction. He describes his legs feeling “wobbly” later that 
day. That night, he woke up with night sweats and felt light-headed. When he tried to get up, he 
felt that the room was spinning and he had to lay down and promptly fell asleep. He felt none of 
these symptoms the next morning, though he did feel tired for 2 days afterwards. He reports no
hives, rashes, paling of his skin, difficulty breathing, swelling of the tongue, or closing of his 
throat, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. He says he would be willing to take the shot again “if it’s 
what’s best for [his] health.”
He reports no weakness, fever, chills. He is still making urine, and reports no dysuria, 
hematuria, incontinence, difficult voiding completely. He reports no shortness of breath, swelling
in his legs or elsewhere on his body, current chest pain, or palpitations.
PMH:
- Hypertension, diagnosed ~2010.
- Heart disease, unknown type, diagnosed ~2016.
- Kidney disease, unknown type, diagnosed ~2016, at same time as heart disease.
- Possible diagnosis of gout. He has been told before that he has gout, but he is not sure when 
or by whom. Currently, he reports pain in his right knee and ankle, but reports no redness, 
swelling, warmth, or tumor in these joints. 
Document1 10/10/19
Surgical history:
- Appendectomy, ~age 20
- R groin hernia repair, ~age 20
Medications:
Pt. reports that he takes carvedilol, hydralazine and a water pill, but cannot report the dosages.
Per call to pharmacy:
Hydralazine 50 mg, TID
Metolazone, 5mg, QD
Carvedilol, 25 mg, BID
Minoxidil, 10 mg, BID
Furosemide 80mg, QD PRN
Isosorbide Mono ER, 60 mg, QD
Clonidine, 0.2 mg, BID
Calcitriol, 0.25 mcg, three times a week
Allergies: None, KNDA.
FH:
- Father, deceased at age 70 of MI. Had "numerous strokes," hypertension, diabetes.
- Mother, alive, age 68. Diabetes. Recently hospitalized for a heart valve issue.
- Sister, alive, age 42. No known medical issues.
- Son, alive, age 23. No known medical issues.
- Son, alive, age 15. No known medical issues.
SH:
Works two jobs as a liquor store deliverer and security guard at Woodbridge mall.
Lives with his cousin. Feels safe at home. His mother lives in North Carolina and is his only “real 
family” who will serve as medical decision maker if needed and serves as his main support 
system. 
Drinks about one or two drinks a year, with no history of increased drinking. Smoked cigarettes 
ten years ago, only occasionally, a few cigarettes a week, for "a few" years. Reports no other 
drug use.
ROS: In addition to HPI, pt. reports:
Constitutional: no fever, chills, weight loss, weight gain, changes in appetite
HEENT: Reports no headaches, LOC, seizure activity, neck stiffness, sore throat
Pulm: as per PHI, reports that taking a deep breath will worsen pain, but reports no difficulty 
breathing, shortness of breath, or cough.
CV: Reports a self-limited episode of chest pain and an elevated heart rate when at rest 
approximately one week ago that lasted ~10 seconds, with no clear trigger or worsening on 
exertion. He described the pain as a sub-sternal tightness that did not radiate. He called his 
nephrologist immediately, who said it may be a result of his anemia and that he should report to 
the ED if it gets worse. He reports no palpitations or chest pain since, including since his flank 
pain began.
GI: Reports constipation, for which he takes a stool oftener. Reports no diarrhea, nausea, 
vomiting, hematochezia, melena.
GU: As per PHI, and reports not erectile dysfunction.
MSK: Full range of motion and strength 5/5 in all joints. Right big toe is mildly tender, with no 
erythema, warmth, or tumor. 
Derm: no rashes or bruising.
Neuro: no changes in vision, changes in hearing, numbness, parasthesias.
Document1 10/10/19
Vitals:
T: 97.5 Tmax: 97.5 @ 09 Jun 07:15
HR: 80 (80 - 82), regular rate and rhythm. 
BP: 124/64 (102/53 - 124/64)
RR: 16 (16 - 18) | SpO2: 94% (94% - 94%) on room air
Physical Exam:
General: Tired-appearing man who appears his age is lying in bed in mild distress.
HEENT: Moist mucous membranes. Poor oral dentition, missing one inferior incisor and with ~3 
gold fillings on superior teeth.
Neck: +JVP visible up to 17 cm. Trachea midline. No lymphadenopathy.
Heart: Regular rate and rhythm, normal S1, S2. A harsh, crescendo-decrescendo murmur is 
audible at all auscultation points, loudest at the right sternal border at the second intercostal 
space. The murmur does not radiate to the neck. No rubs or gallops.
Lungs: Clear to auscultation bilaterally, no wheezes or rales.
Abdomen: Abdomen distended but non-tender. No organomegaly, bowel sounds present. 
Negative Murphy's sign.
Back: No CVA tenderness. No vertebral tenderness. No obvious signs of trauma, no callor, 
tumor, or erythema.
Extremities: 1+ edema on the left to the inferior aspect of the medial malleolus and on the right 
only in the foot. 2+ and equal radial, posterior tibial, and dorsalis pedis pulses bilaterally. No 
cyanosis or clubbing.
Skin: No rashes.
Neuro: CN II-XII intact. Str 5/5 in all extremities. No focal deficits noted. Mentation Intact.
Labs:
LABS (last 24h):
Chemistries:
142 | 94 | 136
--------------------< 89 Ca: 7.5 / Mg: 2.4 / P: 11.4
3.3 | 23.1 | 13.2
Anion Gap: 25.0 / Lactate: 0.6
AST: 9 / ALT: 21 / AlkPhos: 42 / Bili: 0.5 / Dir: <0.2 / Prot: 7.4 / Alb: 2.8 / Lip: 48 
Lactate: 0.6 mmol/L
Corrected calcium: 8.5 mg/dL
CBC:
WBC: 7.3 / Hb: 6.6 / Hct: 19.3 / Plt: 247 / MCV: 90.9
-- Diff: N:78.2% L:7.4% Mo:8.5% Eo:5.1% Baso:0.7%
Arterial blood gas: 021-06-09 13:25
pH Arterial: 7.46
PCO2 Arterial: 37 mmHg
Total CO2 Arterial: 27.4 mEq/L
PO2 Arterial: 116 mmHg
O2 Saturation Arterial: 99.3 %
U/A: 2021-06-09 10:30
Urine Color: Yellow
Urine Squamous Epithelial Cells: 1 /HPF
Urine Color: Yellow
Urine Appearance: CLEAR
Urine Specific Gravity: 1.011
Urine pH: 6.0
Urine Protein: 3+
Document1 10/10/19
Urine Glucose: NEGATIVE
Urine Ketones: NEGATIVE
Urine Bilirubin: NEGATIVE
Urine Blood: 3+
Urine Urobilinogen: <2.0 mg/dL
Urine Leukocyte Esterase: NEGATIVE
Urine Nitrite: NEGATIVE
Urine RBC: >182 /HPF
Urine WBC: 4 /HPF
Urine Squamous Epithelial Cells: 1 /HPF
Imaging:
06/09/2021 08:20 Chest 2 Views (PA/LAT or AP/LAT). IMPRESSION:
Stable mild cardiomegaly and prominent central pulmonary vessels. No acute lung 
parenchymal consolidation is evident.
Assessment/Plan: 48M with a PMH of HTN, heart disease, and CKD who presents with rightsided flank pain concerning for decreasing renal function of unknown etiology given his elevated 
BUN and Cr and reported poor medication compliance concerning for chronic vs. acute on 
chronic kidney disease.
#Flank pain, microhematuria
- Most likely etiology is renal calculi, given his diagnosis of CKD, the location and radiation of 
the pain, and blood seen on UA. 
- Order CT AP to look for stones.
- Consider lithotripsy to aid in stone passage. Place orders for strict I’s and O’s with urine 
filter to look for any stones and analyze for composition.
- Consider urine electrolytes to calculate FeBUN. His diuretic use makes the more informative
FeNa calculation unreliable. His history of renal disease making a clear calculation of post-renal 
FeBUN (>50%) unlikely compared to an intermediate or indeterminant FeBUN. 
- Less likely etiologies include:
- Differential contains no immediately life-threatening diagnoses requiring immediate 
diagnosis and/or intervention. 
- Acute cholecystitis, a common presentation of RUQ pain, is less likely given his slow 
buildup of pain, no clear food triggers, normal white count, lack of systemic symptoms, and 
normal liver function tests and alkaline phosphatase. Chronic cholecystitis is also less likely 
based on his lack of history as above, which makes a chronic inflammatory process in this 
region unlikely. 
- Pyelonephritis can present with unilateral flank pain, but is unlikely without a preceding 
infection and is unlikely to present without other laboratory findings beyond RBCs on U/A, such 
as including WBCs and leukocyte esterase.
- Pneumonia may present, if in a lower lung lobe, with unilateral flank pain. This is 
supported by the pleuritic nature of his pain’s radiation, but less likely given his lack of fever, 
chills, cough, and leukocytosis. This would also not explain his 3+ blood on U/A. 
- AKI or progression of CKD are unlikely to present with unilateral flank pain vs bilateral
or painless presentation, and unlikely to present with only RBCs on U/A with no epithelial cells 
or casts. 
Document1 10/10/19
#CKD, azotemia, possible AKI
- Pt. has highly elevated BUN and Cr, having been told on a previous admission he will require 
hemodialysis, which he has not received.
- Pt. reports being interested in hemodialysis during this admission. He does not currently have 
insurance but is a United States Citizen.
- Consult renal for hemodialysis parameters for this inpatient admission and for outpatient
continued hemodialysis. 
- Consult Social Work for assistance with Medicaid application and transfer to outpatient 
dialysis, pending renal consult recommendations for frequency of hemodialysis.
- Hyperphosphatemia likely requires dialysis and treatment with a phosphate-binding agent such 
as Sevalemar. Consult renal for proper dosing, and possible need for faster-acting aluminum 
treatment vs. treatment via already scheduled dialysis. 
- Other etiologies include AKI on top of existing CKD. This is less likely based on review of 
previous admission records, which showed a Cr of 11.3 and BUN of 114. Though concerning, 
these trends suggest he requires urgent, inpatient hemodialysis but has not had a recent 
increase in these values suggestive of an AKI.
- Continue to monitor daily for hemodialysis plan and monitoring for possible AKI on top of CKD. 
#Chest pain, #Heart disease of unknown etiology, #Heart murmur
- Patient’s murmur most closely fits aortic stenosis (AS) given its loudest point of auscultation 
(aortic) and quality (holosystolic, crescendo-decrescendo) murmur. 
- CHF is a likely diagnosis given this patients medication regimen (carvedilol, hydralazine,
isosorbide) and previous admission for fluid overload. Fluid status, CHF, and renal function are 
all closely related, such that a definitive diagnosis of his heart disease may impact the care plan. 
- Order echocardiogram to look for diagnostic indicators of CHF, AS, or other structural 
problems. 
- Pt. is not currently experiencing any chest pain, but did have an episode of palpitations and 
chest pain significant enough for him to call his physician. In the context of his poorly controlled 
hypertension and heart disease, this is concerning for unstable angina or demand ischemia in 
the context of possible CHF
- Troponin unlikely to be informative given 1-week history of symptoms and delayed renal 
clearance in context of CKD. Consider ProBNP for heart failure.
- Order EKG for changes since last admission.
#Anemia
- Patient will require transfusion today with Hb at 6.6.
- Consider using high transfusion threshold of 8.0 (vs. 7.0) given his history of unknown heart 
disease. 
- Most likely etiology is decreased renal erythropoietin production in context of kidney damage 
secondary to CKD. This is likely given his history of erythropoietin injections.
- Hold erythropoietin injections until his reaction can be more fully explored. Anaphylaxis is 
unlikely, but given his current clinical presentation (low Hb, azotemia pending dialysis), 
treatment with Hb is still the more appropriate approach at this time. 
- Consider iron studies to determine if there is an underlying iron-deficiency anemia or anemia 
of chronic disease (unclear if the latter would be a different pattern than low erythropoietin 
production). May be difficult to interpret iron studies following a blood transfusion. 
#Elevated anion gap
- Difficult to interpret given his normal lactate, only slightly elevated pH, and normal bicarbonate. 
- Metabolic acidosis is common in CKD and an indication for emergent diagnosis. 
- I am honestly not sure what to make of this pattern. I discussed it with the resident, who also 
did not have a great sense for the pattern. It’s likely of mixed metabolic etiology, as he has no 
respiratory findings. His anion gap on discharge from his previous admission was similarly 
elevated, so we just planned to trend it. 
Document1 10/10/19
#Gout
- Order serum uric acid add-on.
- Patient appears to not be in an active flare of gout, given his lack of tophi, erythema, and 
warmth at his painful joints, and that gout is often (though not always) monoarticular. In a patient 
without an active flare and elevated uric acid levels, initiate allopurinol treatment, with renal 
dosing, with attention for severe adverse reactions to this medication.
- UpToDate lists decreased renal dosing as 1.5 mg per unit of eGPR, but hemodialysis dosing is 
unclear, likely requiring renal consult.
I was curious if, given this patient’s likely has a diagnosis of gout, dialysis was enough to control 
his uric acid levels without initiating allopurinol treatment. I skimmed an interesting case study 
where a patient who was anuric for two years was able to be taken off hemodialysis following 
treatment with Febuxostat (1). I wondered if there was any more data beyond this to answer the 
question:
Does treatment of elevated serum uric acid improve outcomes in CKD?
Efficacy of Febuxostat for Slowing the GFR Decline in Patients With CKD and 
Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia: A 6-Month, Double-Blind, Randomized, PlaceboControlled Trial 
Sircar D, Chatterjee S, Waikhom R, Golay V, Raychaudhury A, Chatterjee S, Pandey R. Efficacy of Febuxostat for Slowing the GFR 
Decline in Patients With CKD and Asymptomatic Hyperuricemia: A 6-Month, Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. 
Am J Kidney Dis. 2015 Dec;66(6):945-50. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2015.05.017. Epub 2015 Jul 30. PMID: 26233732.
This is a double-blind randomized clinical trial from a single institution. 
P: 93 patients, 18-65 year-olds with CKD stage 3 or 4 and asymptomatic hyperuricemia.
I: 40 mg Febuxostat QD for 6 months
C: Placebo treatment
O: eGFR decline > 10%
Though none of these patients could be taken off hemodialysis as in the case study, they did 
find a statistically significant difference in eGFR between the treatment and placebo groups at 6 
months. The treatment group actually saw a small, though not statistically significant, increase 
in eGFR from the start of the study to the end. The placebo group saw a decline. Comparison of 
the two was statistically significant.
Limitations include its small (fewer than 50 patients per arm) size and limited follow-up (6 
months), but the results here are promising for future studies. They also suggest that even if 
dialysis can help reduced elevated serum uric acid, additional therapies can help preserve 
kidney function. 
