
Attachments: Liver Ascites Spleen Exam 2020 update.pptx (1739K), Chest_Exam 2016 update.pptx (713K)
Good morning, Dimpie,
First, again I want to thank you for getting your H&P to me promptly, so that I can respond to you in a timely fashion. The
write-up is truly excellent. Below are my comments, both those that affirm the excellent aspects of the H&P and those that
suggest areas for improvement.
1. It is best to include the duration of the chief complaint together with the chief complaint itself at the beginning of the
document. This can have a significant impact on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
2. I commend you for indicating the informant and the informant's reliability right up front. This allows the reader to apply
the appropriate degree of skepticism when looking at the information.
3. I commend you for beginning with the patient's baseline health status at the onset of the HPI.
4. The structure of the narrative in the HPI is excellent: Quite chronological and with plenty of detail to enable the reader
to arrive at a diagnosis that is supported by the clinical information that you provided.
5. There are some language usages that are unconventional enough that I suggest you use alternative expressions. For
example, in the first sentence you say that "he was suffered from running injuries." I assume that what you mean is that he
had injuries from running; but the use of "suffered" in that context is not standard. You could say that "he suffered injuries
from running" but even that is less neutral than is ideal, although some people would definitely state it that way.
6. Later in the paragraph you say "He began Augmentin on twelve hours" when, I believe, you may have meant "every
twelve hours"
7. I had sent you an article that indicates that certain words should not be used to express a patient's reporting or not
reporting symptoms. These include "admit" "deny" "claim" and "endorse". Also, you have used the word "decline" in this
context. I ask that you please not use these specific words in this context. They either imply an adversarial relationship
with the patient (but we don't accuse a patient of a symptom, so we shouldn't say that they "admit" to them or "deny"
them). I had sent you a slide set on the oral patient presentation that has several slides with neutral alternative language,
such as "The patient gives no history of" or "The patient does not report" instead of "deny" and "The patient reports" or
"The patient has" or "The patient experiences" instead of "admit". The meaning of "decline" does not include usage to
indicate the absence of a symptom. If you use language like this in H&Ps it will detract from the strength and validity of the
overall document, which is something you should avoid.
8. The paragraph in the HPI about the prior history of prostatitis has no relevance to the present illness and did not have
to be included in the HPI.
9. Much of what you included in the Review of Systems related directly to the HPI and need not be repeated in the
Review of systems. You need only to say "In addition to what is in the HPI..." and then give those symptoms in the
appropriate place in the Review of Systems.
10. Things that are already mentioned in the HPI need not be repeated elsewhere, as you did with the fasciotomy in the
Past Surgical History. Just say "see HPI"
11. It is EXCELLENT that you have given the manifestations of the patient's allergies. This is very important to inform the
physician of how risky it might be to use a congener of a drug to which the patient is allergic.
12. Although COVID is high on everyone's mind, if you do give a history of immunizations, it would be more informative to
include other vaccines as well, if the patient knows this history, especially, for young adults, tetanus.
13. The family history that you recorded is very good; but it should include siblings, if there are any.
14. The Social History as you recorded it is EXCELLENT.
15. The general description is EXCELLENT.
16. When recording the heart rate, it is more informative and quite conventional to include a description of the rhythm.
(regular or irregular, and if irregular the pattern of the irregularity).
17. I believe that in the height and weight you have reversed the units: kg for height and cm for weight.
18. In the exam of the neck, it is more complete to mention the thyroid.
19. I'm not sure what "no trauma" means in the chest and heart exams.
20. Please percuss chests (and abdomens). I will attach some slides about this to this email.
21. It is more informative to give the dimensions of the liver (liver span) than just to say "no hepatosplenomegaly". I have
attached a slide set about the liver and spleen exam.
22. In describing the erythema of the lower extremities, it would be more complete to mention exactly where the erythema
is.
23. Inflammation includes warmth. It would be more complete to indicate if the erythematous areas are warmer than the
adjacent normal areas.
24. You mentioned depression and suicidal ideation under both "neurology" and "psychology". You need only mention
them under one category.
25. Your discussion under Assessment and Plan is EXCELLENT! It is thorough and very thoughtful.
8/5/2021 https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
26. I'm not sure I agree with your dosage regimen suggestion for vancomycin. It is true that a dose is usually infused over
at least 60 minutes; but I don't think it is 1 mg per minute.
27. Although this patient is immobile, I am not certain that in a patient who may have a compartment syndrome the use of
heparin is widely recommended. If he were to hemorrhage into an already tense compartment, it could have serious
consequences. But I don't claim to be an expert on this and perhaps the risk of DVT is greater than the risk of hemorrhage
into the compartment.
28. In your disposition, you mention pediatric surgery. Would a 23 year-old with this history go to pediatric surgery? I
would think, perhaps, vascular surgery.
29. Your EBM is truly EXCELLENT. You did a good literature search to get a primary source and also you went to a
secondary source (UpToDate). What you found relates very clearly to this patient and you applied what you read to his
diagnosis and management. This is wonderful.
much of what I said above relates to style and not to substance. Every person has their own style, and, while I
would not impose my style heavy-handedly on you, I do want you to be aware of some alternatives to your own style at this
formative stage of your development. The content of the H&P is excellent and that is usually the most difficult hurdle to
overcome. From what I saw with this write-up, it is clear to me that you have a very bright future in clinical medicine,
regardless of the specialty you pursue.
I am looking forward eagerly to your next H&P.
Sincerely,
