
First, I want to thank you for sending the H&P so promptly. It makes it much easier to get my comments back to you in a
timely manner.
Second, especially as a first H&P, this is extremely good. Many of my comments will affirm the strengths that this write-up
incorporates, and I will have some constructive suggestions also. Here are my comments:
1. I commend you for indicating the reliability of the informant right up front. It enables the reader to apply the
appropriate degree of skepticism when reading the document.
2. In addition, I commend you for giving the duration of the chief complaint right up front. That is always important, as
the duration of the CC can have a major impact on the differential diagnosis.
3. It would be more informative to give his exercise tolerance prior to the onset of the HPI (i.e., six months earlier). It
would be useful to know where he started and how suddenly or gradually the decrease in his exercise tolerance evolved.
If it were very sudden, for example, one thing you might thing of is pulmonary embolism.
4. It is your misfortune to have me as your H&P advisor for a number of reasons. One of them is my not wanting you to
use "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in expressing the patients' reporting of symptoms. There are more neutral words
that are not adversarial. I believe that the slide set on the oral presentation that I sent you has several slides that address
this. In addition, so that you won't think I am a complete nut (which, actually, some think I am), I had sent your group a
couple of articles that support this concept.
5. This is very minor: As Patel is a very common name in this area, it might be good to include the first name or the first
initial of the Dr. Patel that this patient sees. But I think it is excellent that you included his primary care physician at all.
This enables you to contact that physician if you feel there may be details that the PMD could provide that will enhance
your understanding of this patient.
6. With EtOH consumption, it is ideal to be more quantitative when you report it. Many EtOH users understate their
consumption because of the stigma that they may perceive. (With opiates, the users often overstate their use so that
when they withdraw they can get "enough" drug to make the withdrawal less uncomfortable.)
7. I personally prefer a little more detail in the family history: ages of the people you mention, for example. Also, it is
always important to include children, if there are any, in the family history.
8. Ideally, the social history should also include the occupational history (not just current status, as some students do). If
he is not currently working the reason for this may be very relevant to the HPI.
9. The absence of chest pain or palpitations in the ROS really belongs in the HPI in this instance.
10. In the vitals, I am one of those oddballs that prefers that you indicate the rhythm right next to the heart rate. (I have a
physical diagnosis textbook that says to do it that way.)
11. In this instance, if you could have gotten the weight and height and then calculated the BMI with the vitals, that would
have been very relevant.
12. The increased work of breathing (which is an EXCELLENT observation on your part), many believe, should be next to
the respiratory rate in the vitals (RR 20, labored when sitting up).
13. It is excellent that you noted the absence of jugular venous distention. Was there hepatojugular reflux? If he is
extremely obese, you might not see neck veins but if present you might see HJR.
14. I am sure it was not possible to feel his PMI, given his body habitus. But, back in the old days, we used to percuss the
anterior chest to determine the location of the left border of cardiac dullness, as a surrogate estimate of cardiac size.
15. You had mentioned to me about not having noted the liver span. In this patient, the liver edge might have been
extremely difficult to palpate; but by doing the "scratch test" you might very well have been able to estimate the liver span.
If you put your stethoscope on the right costal margin and gently scratch the skin from above and then from below, the
sound gets louder when you are scratching over the liver, because sound travels better in a solid than in a liquid or gas.
Find someone who is indebted to you and try this technique on that person. It is believed to be the most accurate clinical
maneuver to estimate liver size. I think I sent you some slides that discuss this. His abdominal was probably wasn't
amenable to looking for a fluid wave and maybe he wasn't mobile enough to make it easy to look for shifting dullness, but
given his scrotal size it would not surprise me it he had ascites.
16. If the patient was at all able to sit up, perhaps with legs hanging over the bed, this is a chest that needed to be
percussed (as they all should) and in which the presence or absence of egophony should have been determined. I say
this especially because of the size of the scrotum.
17. Regarding the scrotum, first, I commend you for looking at it. Given how large it was, a maneuver that is very
important is transillumination, which is placing a very bright pen light against the scrotum and seeing if the light comes out
the other side. It is a good first step in assessing whether scrotal swelling is due to a hydrocele or a solid mass, among
other things.
9/15/21, 10:51 AM Re: H&P 1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
18. In this instance, the presence or absence of penile edema would be important to note, to help understand the cause of
the scrotal swelling.
19. It is EXCELLENT that you attempted to quantify the extent of the lower extremity edema. When you do this, the ideal
landmark is the tibial tuberosity, as it does not move and that way, from day to day or observer to observer the observation
is reproducible. Some people might even try to measure calf circumference (at the same spot in each leg). I am
concerned that he has scrotal swelling but that the lower extremity edema does not extend very high up. This may be
more than simple fluid retention.
20. The anemia should have been included in your impressions in your assessment and plan (which, by the way, is very
thoughtfully written). I don't think it is simply dilutional from CHF, although that is possible. I say that because the serum
sodium does not reflect dilution of his blood by retained fluid. It is always useful to include the MCV and RDW, especially
with anemic patients.
21. To your assessment and plan I would have added two more diagnoses: anemia and morbid obesity. This patient
meets criteria for bariatric surgery, if he can pass the psychological screening that is also a requirement. And I feel very
strongly that many physicians do not address anemia as a problem that needs to be evaluated and managed. It is
possible that his congestive heart failure is aggravated by the relatively decreased tissue oxygen delivery due to his
anemia. (If he has ascites, he also can't absorb certain nutrients due to edematous bowel, and he certainly can't absorb
oral meds.)
22. I am extremely impressed by your approach to Evidence Based Medicine and the thoroughness with which you sought
it out and applied it to this patient.
TJ, although it looks like I have a lot of comments, many of them are meant to reinforce your already excellent practices
and strengths. And your pursuit of questions in published literature is indeed exemplary. Please, please send me an EPA
ASAP so I can complete the form promptly. With this write-up you have set the bar very high for yourself, and I am really
looking forward to your next H&P.
If you'd like to speak in real time with me about this, I can do so up to about 4:00 today.
Respectfully,
