
Submitted Thu 10/14 12:35 AM
Informant: Patient and husband, both reliable
Chief Complaint: “I’ve been having chest and abdominal pain for the past few days with vomiting and 
diarrhea.”
HPI: This is a 68 year old female with a PMHx of scleroderma diagnosed in 2005, pulmonary hypertension 
diagnosed in November of last year who presents with a 3-4 day history of chest pain and left sided 
abdominal pain rated 8/10. She reports having similar pain in the past, but never this bad. She reports 
multiple months of vomiting, approximately 3 episodes of non-bloody vomiting per week, 2 episodes 
yesterday and 3 episodes of diarrhea per week. Her partner at bedside states she has gone through cycles 
of pain/vomiting/diarrhea in that past several years that lasts for weeks and resolves spontaneously and 
recurs. She last lost 10-15 pounds in the past year and states food smells bad to her and she has 
decreased appetite, but reports a desire to eat right now. She also reports several months of food getting 
stuck in her throat. She reports no shortness of breath, fevers, chills or recent travel. Currently she has no 
chest pain and states the pain is in her left side now. 
Of note, the patient states she has been on TPN in the past, about 3 years ago due to chronic diarrhea 
and vomiting which she was told was due to her scleroderma. Her partner states she was on it for 1 
month and had an issue with her arm so it was discontinued. Later, she was on it for 4 months but was 
discontinued due to a blood clot. 

PMD Unknown
PMH:
- Scleroderma dx 2005 per patient
- Pulmonary hypertension dx November 2020 per patient
- Small Intestinal Bacteria Overgrowth (SIBO)
- Osteoporosis
- Arthritis
PSH:
- Multiple SBOs; Small bowel resection with LOA in 2010 with end-to-side anastomosis, colectomy in 2019 
with 8cm of bowel removed
- Appendectomy
- Cholecystectomy
- Tubal Ligation
Social History:
- Occasional alcohol use during vacation and family events
- No history of prior tobacco use
- No illicit drug use
- Occupational history: Chef, retired 10 years ago
Family History:
- Mother and father died in their 80s of unknown cause
- 3 children, 1 boy has history of asthma, other 2 children have no known medical issues 
Hanlon TJ H&P 5 
Submitted Thu 10/14 12:35 AM
Medications
- Amox TR k Clav Tab 500 mg PO BID
- Fluoxetine 40 mg PO at night
- Omeprazole 40 mg PO BID
- Famotidine 40 mg PO x2 at night
- Sucrafaltate 1 tab 4 times/day
- Copper 2 per day
- Folic Acid 400 mcg PO daily
- Vitamin D 350 (chol) 50,000 IU 2 per week
- Tadalafil 20 mg PO daily
- Onadesteron 4mg q6hrs PRN
- Prolia 60 MG/MT every 6 months
- Metoprolol ER 12.5 mg PO daily
Allergies: Codeine (rash), Prednisolone Acetate Opthalmic (unknown reaction), Bacitracin (rash)
ROS:
- Constitutional: (+) Nausea, vomiting weakness, weight loss, loss of appetite, headache (-) fever, chills
- ENT: (+) dysphagia
- Cardiac: (+) Chest pain, (-) palpitations, (-) dyspnea on exertion
- Pulm (-) shortness of breath, (-) hemoptysis
- GI: See HPI
- Neurologic: No focal weakness, numbness, or tingling. 
Physical Exam:
VITALS 
T: 97.9 
HR: 75 regular
BP: 101/57 
RR: 20
Weight: 65 lbs, BMI 12.7
PHYSICAL EXAM
GENERAL: Patient appears emaciated and ill, in mild distress due to abdominal pain. Patient is alert and 
oriented to person, place and time.
HEENT: Parotid gland enlargement, no tenderness or erythema. Mucous membranes dry, no scleral icterus
or conjunctival pallor
CARDIO: Regular rate and rhythm, Normal S1 and S2, no murmurs rubs or gallops
PULM: Clear and equal to auscultation bilaterally, no rales, rhonchi, or wheezing.
GI: Soft, distended, faint hypoactive bowel sounds, tympanic to percussion. No abdominal tenderness or 
palpable masses
EXTREM: No edema, 2+ radial pulse, no deformities noted
SKIN: No ecchymosis, or rashes noted.
NEURO: Patient appears cognitively intact, no focal deficits.
LABS
135 | 101 | 9
--------------------< 70 Ca: 6.8 
2.6 | 22.3 | 0.4
Hanlon TJ H&P 5 
Submitted Thu 10/14 12:35 AM
WBC: 4.5 / Hb: 10.8 (MCV 108.5) / Hct: 34.4 / Plt: 230 
-- Diff: N:75.10% L:14.8% Mo:9.3% Eo:0.0% Baso:0.4%
PT: 20.1 / PTT: x / INR: 1.78 
AST: 29 / ALT: 20 / AlkPhos: 36 / Bili: 0.6 / Dir: 0.3 / Prot: 5.1 / Alb: 3.2 / Lip: 23 
Troponin: 31 ng/mL, repeat after 2 hours, 21 ng/mL 
IMAGING
CXR: No acute pulmonary pathology.
CT A/P: Distended esophagus, stomach, duodenum and multiple areas within the small bowel as well as 
some distention in the transverse colon.. These findings are consistent with the patients known history for 
number of years of scleroderma involving predominantly the bowel with marked dysfunction of motility.
CTA Chest w/ Contrast: No central pulmonary emboli are identified. Fibrotic changes are noted at the 
subpleural lung bases. There is marked esophageal dilatation. These findings are consistent with the 
patient's history of scleroderma. 5 mm lingular solid nodule is noted
EKG: NSR at 70 bpm, normal axis deviation, no ST elevations. 
ASSESSMENT & PLAN
This is a 68 year old female with 16 year hx of scleroderma, multiple abdominal surgeries for SBO, and 
pulmonary hypertension presenting with chronic vomiting and diarrhea who presents with 4 days of chest 
pain and worsening left sided pain and weight loss in the setting of chronic vomiting, and diarrhea. 
Patient appears emaciated with mildly distended and tympanic abdomen. Troponin was 31 on 
presentation, now 21., Magnesium increased from 0.4 to 1.5 after 2g of Magnesium IV, Potassium 
increased from 2.6 to 2.8 with 40meq PO and 10 meq IV. CT A/P showed distended esophagus, stomach, 
and bowel with no acute findings. CTA chest showed no acute findings.
#Failure to thrive
- Patient appears cachectic with persistent weight loss (BMI now of 12.7), vomiting, and diarrhea over the past 
year, likely due in part to GI involvement from underlying scleroderma. Other potential causes or exacerbations of 
chronic diarrhea include infectious causes such as rotavirus or parasitic infectious although they would be more 
acute and less likely to be present for a year, but could be ruled out with stool studies. Undiagnosed Crohn’s 
disease could cause chronic diarrhea with weight loss, although it would be rare to present this late in life, it could 
be ruled out with a tissue transglutaminase antibody test. Outpatient records showed no documented negative 
tissue transglutaminase test. Will plan to treat patient with Zofran for nausea and attempt a trial of PO intake to 
see if tolerable. Patient and partner are adverse to TPN given previous complications including DVT and line 
infiltration in the past. Will consult Dr. Seril, the patient’s GI doctor, and Dr. Su, rheumatology, for guidance on 
managing the patient’s malnutrition that would be in line with their goals. The patient mentions she has only had 
virtual appointments with Dr. Su over the past 1 year. 
#Abdominal pain
- Abdominal exam demonstrated distention and tympany to percussion while CT A/P mentioned distended 
loops of small bowel and colon likely consistent with chronic changes due to bowel dysmotility in setting of 
scleroderma. The patient has a history of SIBO and is taking Augmentin prophylactically, but SIBO resistant to 
Augmentin could be contributing to her abdominal pain, distention, and diarrhea and could be further 
analyzed with a hydrogen breath test. If positive, alternative antibiotic therapy such as Rifaximin could be
trialed as it has been shown to have effectiveness in SIBO.
