,
Having carefully reviewed your sixth H&P, I have several comments, mostly laudatory and some with suggestions for
further growth and improvement. They are:
1. It is excellent that you identified the informant right up front and included the reliability.
2. It is more complete to include the duration of the chief complaint together with the chief complaint itself, as this often
has an impact on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint, thus guiding the questions whose answers
constitute the HPI.
3. The narrative of the HPI that you composed is very sound, quite chronological (always a good idea) and
comprehensible. It is excellent that you explicitly stated his general condition at the onset of the HPI. It is important that
you noted the absence of weight loss; but with individuals who are prone to ascites it is useful also to inquire about weight
gain (although you did note his sense of increased abdominal girth). Also, with hepatitis C, it is useful to include whether
there has been any injecting drug use in the history (although you did mention "no other drug use" in the social history)..
4. It is commendable that you avoided the words "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in describing the reporting of
symptoms.
5. I am pleased that you included the ages of the individuals mentioned in the family history.
6. You mentioned "no other drug use" in the social history; but in this instance that should have been part of the HPI.
7. It is very good that you described the heart rhythm as part of the vital signs.
8. This is a patient who absolutely should have had orthostatic vital signs recorded. His history is consistent with blood
loss and his chief complaint is lightheadedness.
9. It is good that you attempted to measure the cardiac size on physical examination; but I caution you not to use the
mid-clavicular line as a landmark, because it moves. I will attach a paper that explains why this is not a reproducible
landmark on physical exam, and some slides I have put together regarding the chest exam that mention this.
10. It is excellent that you noted the absence of gynecomastia and palmar erythema. If possible, when looking for signs of
estrogen excess on physical, it is good to mention the escutcheon (male or female). I will attach some slides about
extrahepatic signs of liver disease.
11. It is excellent that you looked for shifting dullness (not "shifting wave dullness"). The word "wave" is used in "fluid
wave" which is also a finding in ascites. I have attached slides about the liver and spleen exam that describe these.
12. (This is a little pedantic: It is "caput Medusae" not "caput Medusa"; but who studies Latin any more?
13, Your assessment and plan are very good; but it would have been useful to include that there is pre-renal azotemia
(BUN out of proportion to creatinine), which is almost certainly explained by his active GI bleeding.
14. Your EBM is right on track, with well-chosen articles nicely interpreted and applied to this patient's management.
you have made very good progress over these six weeks and what you have learned will serve you very well as you
move forward. I have enjoyed teaching you, and I thank you for the appreciative comments in your email.
Sincerely,
