
I have reviewed your first H&P very carefully. It has many strengths, and there are a few areas that I think you can
improve. My comments are as follows:
1. It is excellent that you indicate the informant and the informant's reliability right up front. That is a very conventional
way to do it, and it lets the reader know immediately the extent to which skepticism needs to be applied to interpreting the
clinical information.
2. It is excellent that you indicate clearly the duration of the chief complaint. This has a significant impact on the
differential diagnosis from the outset.
3. Although it is, to an extent, a matter of style, it may not always be best to include a list of the past illnesses in the
introductory statement in the HPI. If these illnesses are relevant to the HPI, they can be integrated into the HPI in their
correct chronological place. In this instance, you might have written a paragraph, at the beginning, summarizing the onset
and course of the hypertension, prior stroke, and atrial fibrillation up to the time of the chief complaint, thus setting the
stage for the event (the chief complaint) that caused him to come to the hospital. In describing the timing of these events,
you would use the moment of admission as the point of reference for each of them. (E.g., ...He was in his usual state of
health five days prior to admission when he stopped taking prescribed coumadin in preparation for cataract surgery, which
he had two days prior to admission (which is usually recorded as "PTA"). I indicated his status at the onset of the chief
complaint because that is always relevant.
4. It is excellent that you included jaw pain as a pertinent negative (although, given how his ocular problem presented,
giant cell arteritis seems very unlikely).
5. In an inpatient admission note, it is important to include, in the items given in the PMH, how they have been managed
and the extent to which they are controlled. If this is already mentioned in the HPI, then that information need not be
repeated. To me, PMH and HPI are mutually exclusive.
6. Because the chief complaint involved the right eye, the vitrectomy should go in the HPI, not the PSH.
7. It is excellent that you indicated concern for the type of allergic reaction, even though the patient did not know it. It is
always important to include the type of allergic manifestation, in part because it may tell you that it is intolerance and not
true allergy, and in part because it tells you how risky it might be to use a congener of a drug to which the patient has had
an allergic reaction. For example, you might risk repeating a rash but not anaphylaxis.
8. In the family history, it is more complete to include the ages of people mentioned as well as whether they are alive or
dead. Children are an integral part of the family history. Also, there is a list of potential familial diseases that are often
mentioned, whether present or absent, including but not limited to: anemia, arthritis, connective tissue disease,
tuberculosis, psychiatric disease, diabetes, thyroid disease (especially Graves), and malignancy. When I was a fellow at
Sloan Kettering I was struck by the extent to which cancer runs in families.
9. The social history should include marital status and some details about the home environment (secure and,
sometimes, type of heat [e.g., if there are respiratory complaints])
10. In the Vitals, it is more complete, and often very informative, to include the rhythm right up front with the heart rate. It
is either regular or, if not, "regularly irregular (with the pattern, e.g., bigeminal) or "irregularly irregular". If the latter, you
should indicate where you took the pulse, as with atrial fibrillation the rate is different at the apex and the wrist.
11. It would be more complete to indicate whether there was any conjunctival discharge from this very bloodshot eye, and
if there were, whether it was serous, bloody, or purulent.
12. It is wonderful that you listened for carotid bruits.
13. There were extenuating circumstances, but ideally this is a patient who should have had a funduscopic exam as soon
as possible, to determine if he had either a retinal artery embolus or an intraocular hemorrhage. I am a little confused
about which eye is the affected one, as in the HPI you speak of the blurred vision in the left eye but in the physical the
gross abnormalities are in the right eye.
14. It would have been more complete to have done a rough visual acuity exam for each eye. Also, it would have been
informative to do direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes on both eyes.
15. EVERYBODY says "RRR" but it is only the rhythm that is regular. The rate is either normal, rapid, or slow.
16. Please percuss chests. If you remind me, I will do a crude demonstration on the technique at Monday's Clinical
Challenge.
17. Please measure liver span and record it in centimeters. I will attach some slides about this.
18. In the extremities, it would be more complete to mention at least dorsalis pedis pulses in addition to edema. Also,
capillary refill is relevant for this patient, as are other signs of vascular sufficiency such as the presence of hair on the toes
and the condition of the toenails.
19. Your discussion in the assessment and plan is interesting if a little superficial. For example, it might have been more
complete to suggest ambulatory monitoring to determine the extent and frequency of arrhythmias if present, especially
given the very serious consequence of arterial embolization in any case but especially with this patient's ocular problem.
6/25/2021 Re: H&P #1

20. Last of all, I want to commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in your H&P.
I don't know whether your orientation mentioned it, but one thing that students often do with their written H&Ps is a
literature search and appending of at least one relevant article. For example, in this case, you might look up something
about how to manage anticoagulants around eye surgery. You could write a little paragraph summarizing the article and
maybe do a PICO analysis of the content. Then I could check off an extra box under "EBM" in the EPA assessment.
I will try to phone you later this afternoon to discuss these comments in real time if you wish. I will send you a text first.
Matt, although there is room for improvement in this H&P (which applies to all of us, including me), it does have many
strengths and I am sue you will build on them with subsequent efforts. I look forward to future interactions with you.
