
Attachments: RIME evaluation model original article Acad Med 1999.pdf (526K), RIME evaluation model.pdf (37K)
Thank you, Matt, for using an approach that enables me to access the document without having to get separate
permission. And thank you, also, for getting it to me in good time so that I was able to get it back to you promptly. I have
read this H&P carefully and, as usual, have several comments, many of them laudatory and some that suggest room for
improvement. They are:
1. It is great that you gave the duration of the chief complaint. It would be more conventional to pick out one symptom
from the three that you report as the actual chief complaint. My guessis that the nausea and vomiting would be the actual
chief complaint. But what you did is not intrinsically undesirable.
2. I commend you for including the reliability of the informant.
3. The overall HPI is excellent in many ways. Except that you started with the current episode, what you wrote is
properly chronological in its construction and gives nearly all the necessary details. It would be strengthened if you had
included what his health status was at the actual onset of the drinking in college. It is always good to start of with the
health status at the onset of the present illness (although the temptation is to start with the chief complaint, which often is
NOT the beginning of the HPI). The reason for this is that it is important to know the condition of the "protoplasm" on
which an illness descends, which often is helpful in determining the overall prognosis.
4. Rather than give a date in the HPI (in this case, 9 May), it is more effective to state how long prior to admission
something happened. That enables the reader to get a clear impression of the chronological sequence of events.
5. It is excellent that you give the temporal relationship of the meals to the symptoms. It would be more complete to
include what he ate, as intolerance of certain types of food may have differential diagnostic significance.
6. It is excellent that you explicitly state what makes the pain worse. It would be more complete to include, also, what, if
anything, alleviates it.
7. Might you have omitted a "not" in the sentence about OTC medications?
8. Your description of the pain is very, very good!
9. I think that in the last line you wrote "and" when you meant to write "any".
10. I want to commend you specifically for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in the write-up. Bravo!
11. In the ROS, under HEENT, you wrote "Patient states vision changes". Did you mean "no vision changes"? If not, then
it would be important to describe vision changes that he has experienced.
12. You have written a very nice FH. Some people would also include a list of certain familial diseases that are absent
from the family history (such as malignancies, rheumatologic diseases, coagulation disorders, to name a few). This is not
widely practiced by students from this medical school; but when I was a student it was a requirement. There are about 10
such diseases, depending in part on the ethnicity of the patient.
13. Given the recent history of vomiting, orthostatic HR and BP would be useful, in part to assess how sick he is and in
part to help determine how vigorously his fluids should be replenished.
14. Your assessment is very nicely written, succinct yet thorough enough.
15. The discussion of the new onset back pain is very, very nicely done. It strikes me as unusual that an episode of
pancreatitis would occur during a period of abstinence; but this young man has established chronic pancreatitis and that is
much less predictable. I think acute-on-chronic pancreatitis is a pretty good bet.
16. I'm not sure your speculation about a kidney stone is necessary, as none was note on the CT scan. It is true that uric
acid stones, if not obstructing a ureter, may be missed, as they are radiolucent.
I am attaching some material about what is sometimes called the "RIME" scheme (R = reporter; I = interpreter; M =
manager; E = educator). After four write-ups, you should move beyond the early stages to "educator" by looking up some
relevant literature and including a brief discussion of it at the end of the write-up. Sometimes this is done under the
umbrella of "EBM" (evidence-based medicine) and is something that all physicians should incorporate into their practices.
It is part of the lifelong learning that is a fundamental principle of our profession. This write-up shows continued growth
from your earlier ones and I am looking forward to your next H&Ps.
