CC: Swelling and discoloration of right forearm one week after trauma to right arm
Informant: Patient and his wife provided the history and they are reliable
HPI
Patient is a 64 year old man who was generally in good health until a STEMI 9 years ago (2012) 
c/b cardiac arrest / HFrEF s/p coronary stenting / AICD placement. He reports his EF was as 
low as 15% and is presently 35% at last follow up with his cardiologist. Following that 
hospitalization he was placed on ASA/Plavix and subsequently had another MI in 2015 s/p 
stenting. He was then switched to ASA/Brilenta for antiplatelet therapy. He subsequently 
developed bilateral superficial thombosis in the lower extremities that were treated with 
antiplatelet therapy and resolved 3 years ago. He was in his normal state of health until one 
week ago when his anterior arm struck a pipe. A local ecchymosis developed at the point of 
contact that measured approximately 2 inches in diameter shortly after the local trauma to his 
arm. In the last day he has noticed increased swelling in his right forearm and it is visibly larger 
compared to left forearm. Pt notes in the last day his right arm has also changed color and is 
now visibly red and “feels heavy.” Other than the initial trauma to his anterior arm he has no 
pain in his right arm or forearm. He also describes no change in sensation but does have some 
tingling in the tips of his first and second digits. He otherwise states that he has no SOB / cough 
/ chest pain / palpitations / fever / chills / fatigue / nausea / vomiting.
PMH
 STEMI c/b HFrEF and stenting (2012)
 STEMI c/b stenting (2015)
 LE Superficial Thombosis (2018)
 HTN
 HLD
PSH
 PCI Stenting (2012 and 2015)
 AICD placement (2012)
Medications
 Brilinta 60mg PO bid
 Entresto 24-26mg PO bid
 Inspra 25mg PO once daily
 Lasix 20mg PO once daily
 Lipator 40mg PO once daily
Allergies
 Carrots
 Shrimp
 Aldactone
FH
 Mother had no known health problems and passed away in her 80s
 Father had history of heart of disease including MI in 60s and passed away in his 70s
 One sibling, a sister is 62 and has HTN and no other known health problems
 He is not aware of any FH of clotting disorders
SH
 Lives at home with his wife. Feels safe.
 Has two kids that live on their own, ages 34 and 31. Neither has any known health 
problems.
 Works as a plumber
 Starting smoking as teenager for approximately ten years at about a pack per week –
1.3 pack years
 Does not use alcohol
 No IVDA or other drug use
ROS
 General: See HPI
 Neuro: Patient states no dizziness. Numbness / tingling as stated in HPI
 HEENT: Patient states vision changes / no ocular pain / no coryza / no sinus pressure / 
no sore throat / no change in hearing
 CV: See HPI 
 Lungs: See HPI 
 GI: See HPI. Also no change in bowel habits and no blood in stool and no abdominal 
pain.
 GU: Patient states no changes in urinary habits / does not wake at night to urinate / no 
pain or blood on urination / no flank pain 
 MSK: Patient states no new muscle or joint pain 
 Heme: See HPI. No other new bruises or bleeding
 Derm: Patient states no new rashes
 Psych: Patient states he has a positive mood with little anxiety
Vitals: HR76 with regular rhythm, BP 130/75, T98.2F, RR 16 and not labored, SpO2 98% on 
RA
PE
 General: Patient is in no acute distress, is well nourished, and answers appropriately
 Neuro: A&Ox3, CN II-XII are intact, motor and sensation grossly intact, no obvious FND
 HEENT: EOMI, PERRLA, sclera anicteric, no conjunctival pallor, no signs or pharyngeal 
erythema, lesions, or ulcers
 Neck: Trachea is midline, no elevation in JVD or hepatojugular reflux, no palpable 
lymph nodes, could not palpate thyroid
 CV: Tachycardic with faint heart sounds, could not distinguish between S1 and S2, no 
murmurs, rubs, or gallops
 Lungs: Normal inspiratory effort. Lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no 
wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. Normal resonance to percussion bilaterally and normal 
tactile fremitus bilaterally in all fields.
 Abdominal: Soft and nondistended. Normal BS. Nontender to palpation in all four 
quadrants. No rigidity. The liver and spleen were not palpable.
 Extremities: Radial and DP and 2+/2+ and symmetric. Equal strength in upper 
extremities on flexion/extension of wrists and forearm. No signs of edema in shins
bilaterally. Warm and well perfused. 
 Skin: See HPI regarding right UE. No evidence of rashes, skin breakdown, or ulcers.
Labs:
 CBC: WBC 6.2, H/H 14.9/47.4, MCV 94.4
 BMP: Glucose 114, BUN 15, Cr 1.0, Ca 8.9, Na 140, K 4.3, Cl 102, Bicarb 27
 LFT: Protein 7.4, Albumin 4.5, BiliTotal: 0.8, BiliDirect: <0.2, AST 23, ALT 18
Assessment: This is a 64 year old male with PMH of STEMIx2 c/b cardiac arrest and AICD 
placement, HTN, and prior LE thrombosis that presents to us one week after trauma to right arm 
with upper extremity swelling and discoloration. His ROS does not suggest any significant pain, 
loss of function, of loss of sensation in the affected extremity and he reports no SOB / chest 
pain / or cough. On exam, he has good pulses in both upper extremities bilaterally, swelling of 
the right distal arm and forearm, and a reddened skin tone.
Plan:
1) Upper extremity swelling:
a) Upper extremity venous thombosis: Given the slow onset of the presentation, 
the patient’s history of VTE, and the local trauma one week prior an upper 
extremity thrombosis is most likely. While not as concerning as a DVT in the LE, 
there is still concern for PE if embolization were to occur. The patient should be 
started on a heparin drip to prevent any further increase in size in the presumed 
clot.
b) Upper extremity arterial infarction: An upper extremity arterial infarction would be 
expected to present much more acutely and would likely present with pale skin 
color in the affected extremity due to poor perfusion. While it would depend on 
the artery occluded and the extent of the occlusion, he also would not be likely to 
have strong pulses.
c) Compartment syndrome: Again the onset would be expected to be much 
quicker, but would also likely be in the setting of trauma. Given the risk, 
however, it would be prudent to call for an orthopedic consult to rule out and 
evaluate the need for possible decompression by fasciotomy.
d) Soft tissue infection: The most dangerous soft tissue infection would be 
necrotizing fasciitis and requires urgent surgical intervention, as the infection can 
spread very quickly. Again the onset was very slow and more importantly the 
enlarged right forearm was not especially warm to touch and showed no other 
signs of infection. Additionally, no crepitus was noted as might be expected in a 
rapidly progressive infection. 
2) Hematology work up: Given the likely diagnosis of an upper extremity thrombosis and 
the patient’s recurrent formation of new clots despite being on dual antiplatelet therapies, 
a hematology work up is warranted to investigate the possibility of a clotting disorder.tc