
History: obtained from patient who appears to reliable source but we are pending collateral from 
wife and GI doctor 
CC: lightheadedness
HPI: 
Patient is a 62 y/o male with a PMHx of Hepatitis C induced cirrhosis presenting with 
lightheadedness for the past 6 hours. Patient was well at the age of 40 when he was diagnosed with 
HCV after abnormal liver enzymes on routine health examination by his PMD in 2000. Unknown 
source of infection. Reports he was initially treated with interferon which was not successful at 
eliminating the viral load. He was found to be genotype 1. He stopped following up with his 
gastroenterologist as a personal decision and then in 2014, he began having ascites and was found to 
have a cirrhotic liver. He returned to his gastroenterologist and was treated with 
Ledipasvir/Sofosbuvir and thereafter HCV was undetectable. Over the next two years, he required 5 
paracentesis and was treated with spironolactone and Lasix. After those two year, he was no longer 
having ascites and diuretics were held. In January of this year, he began feeling more distended was 
found to have reaccumulating of ascites. He reestablished care with his gastroenterologist and 4 L 
drained. HCV still negative. 
Patient reports that earlier today, he suddenly felt a gradually increase in lightheadedness while 
sitting in a chair at a family barbeque. He was noted to appear pale by this sister which prompted a 
visit to the emergency department. He reports that this has never happened before but does note he 
has had intermittent black, well formed, non-malodourous stools over the past year with the most 
recent one being this morning. He has had approximately one to two black stools per month but 
otherwise he describes his bowel movements as normal brown stools. No abdominal discomfort 
with food consumption during this period. He has not told his GI doctor about these symptoms. He 
has not had a colonoscopy in the past. No LOC or fall. No palpitations or chest pain. No nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, or hematemesis. No recent weight loss, feelings of fatigue, 
early satiety, easy bruising, or nosebleeds. No recent increase in thirst or urination. No headaches, 
paresthesia, or feelings of weakness. No skin discolorations.
PCP: Dr. Andrew Dargan (GI doctor)
PMH: 
Per HPI
He has no tattoos and has no knowledge of blood exposure in the past. 
PSurghx: 
None
Meds: Patient has been taking his medication as prescribed daily. No NSAID use.
Lasix 20 mg oral 1 tab daily
spironolactone 50 mg oral 1 tab daily
Allergies:
No Known Allergies
Gardner Ryan H&P 6 submitted Wed 202 03 23 11:49 pm
FHx:
Mother: dementia in 70’s, passed away from unknown heart problems in her late70’s (2001)
Father: lifelong smoker with emphysema, unknown cause of death in 80’s 2005
Sister: Alive, 59 y/o, HTN
No children
No family history of GI ulcers or malignancy.
Social:
Alcohol: social drinking in past but stopped when diagnosed with HCV. Social drinking described 
as one six pack per month prior to diagnosis.
Tobacco: 1 pack per day for ~37 years; smoked from high school till 2010, stopped, restarted 2020
when he became stressed about COVID-19. No interest in quitting but reports he is no longer 
stressed.
Drugs: No other drug use
Lives in South Jersey (Woodbury) with his wife of many years who is a great source of support for 
him. Drove to somerset today without his wife to visit his aunt for a family barbeque. His highest 
level of education is high school, and he has never served in the military. He works as a mechanic 
and has done so since graduating high school. No recent travel or infections.
ROS: Per HPI, otherwise negative 
Physical Exam:
VITALS 
T: 97.1 Tmax: 97.1 
HR: 96 (89 - 96) regular rhythm 
BP: 118/72 (109/60 - 118/72)
RR: 20 (18 - 20) with unlabored breaths 
Sa02: 99% on room air 
General: Age-appropriate male in NAD
HEENT: + mucosal and conjunctival pallor. No lymphadenopathy appreciated. No tracheal 
deviation. No nuchal rigidity. No erythema or exudates. Anicteric. No yellowing of buccal mucosa. 
No yellowing of the junction of the hard and soft palate, ventral surface of the tongue or cheeks
Chest: Regular rate, no MGR, resonant to percussion with left border cardiac dullness at the 5th
intercostal space at the mid-clavicular line, PMI was found at the left 5th intercostal space 
approximately one inch medial to the mid-clavicular line while the patient was leaning forwards, no 
RV heave, no gynecomastia, 
Lungs: Clear to auscultation bl, normal chest excursion, resonate to percussion
Abdominal: Liver approx. 9cm on percussion (no free edge palpable), no splenomegaly appreciated, 
mild distention with minimal shifting wave dullness, hyperactive bowel sounds, tympanitic to 
percussion, no tenderness to palpation, no caput medusa 
Extremities: No edema, no clubbing, no palmar erythema 
Skin: No evidence of petechiae, purpura, or ecchymosis. No Jaundice.
Neuro: CN2-12 intact, 5/5 strength in all major muscle groups, A&Ox3, no asterixis
Psych: responding to questions appropriately
Gardner Ryan H&P 6 submitted Wed 202 03 23 11:49 pm
Labs:
LABS 
138 | 105 | 31
--------------------< 99 Ca: 8.2 Mg: 1.8 
4.8 | 21.7 | 0.6
WBC: 7.2 / Hb: 8.0 / Hct: 28.1 / Plt: 106 
-- Diff: N:80.30% L:11.1% Mo:6.7% Eo:1.1% Baso:0.4%
AST: 20 / ALT: 20 / AlkPhos: 57 / Bili: 0.4 / Dir: <0.2 / Prot: 6.1 / Alb: 3.5 
MCV 71, Plt 106, BUN 31/Cr 0.6, aPTT 31, INR 1.1, PT 14
Imaging: 
Abdominal US Complete- IMPRESSION: Heterogeneous echogenic liver with nodular contour is 
suggestive of cirrhosis. Splenomegaly. 
Abdominal Doppler Complete US- IMPRESSION: Reversal of flow in the extrahepatic portal 
vein. Right portal vein not visualized.
Assessment and Plan:
62 y/o M w/ PMHx of Hepatitis C induced cirrhosis presenting with lightheadedness for the past 6 
hours with recent melena and an intermittent history of melena over the past year. In the ED, found 
to have Hgb of 8.0 and has had 3 episodes of melena since his arrival with + hemoccult stool 
testing. GI was consulted and are planning for an EGD in the morning for likely esophageal varices 
as he is hemodynamically stable currently.
#Symptomatic anemia
#GI Bleed
- Patient presenting with pre-syncopal symptoms in the setting of melena. Likely upper GI bleed
from varices in setting of cirrhosis and imaging and clinical picture consistent with portal 
hypertension resulting in blood loss anemia. Imaging negative for portal thrombosis. Other 
possibilities include upper GI ulcers or malignancy. Patient has risk factors including smoking but
does not use NSAIDs, EtOH or family history. He has not had discomfort with food consumption in 
the past but given longer history of intermittent melena and microcytic anemia, may have acute 
variceal bleed with existing ulcer or malignancy. Malignancy less likely also given lack of 
constitutional symptoms
- Hemodynamically stable
- Patient consented for blood, 2 large bore IVs, type and cross, will give 1L IVF
- Hgb on presentation 8.0
- CBC q6h daily for now
-Per GI, start on clear liquid diet for now, NPO at midnight. Recommend protonix and octreotide
gtt. 
- Iron studies pending, likely will need to be stated on iron
-Continue tracking BUN
- Transfuse goal Hgb >7
Gardner Ryan H&P 6 submitted Wed 202 03 23 11:49 pm
#Hepatitis C
#Cirrhosis
- Patient reports history of cirrhosis from hepatitis C s/p treatment with HCV undetectable
-MELD score = 6
- Given ascites on exam in setting of GI bleeding, starting on ceftriaxone 1g x7 days for SBP ppx
- No signs of hepatic encephalopathy, AAOx3, no asterixis
-Synthetic function appears intact 
- f/u hepatitis immune status; vaccinate for Hep A and B 
- f/u Hepatitis C virus PCR
- Avoid NSAIDs
-GI recommending HCC screening MRI with liver tumor protocol or Triple-phase contrast 
enhanced CT, holding diuretics for now, and 2gm sodium restriction 
#Thrombocytopenia 
-Consistent with Hx of cirrhosis, will call GI doctor for baseline labs
