
Reliability: Patient is a reliable source of information; history is corroborated by patient’s 
son and daughter at bedside. 
CHIEF COMPLAINT: 
“I have been needing higher levels of oxygen to walk and to sleep for past few days.”
HPI:
The patient is a 68YO M with a PMH significant for IPF treated with Ofev and 2L O2 who 
was previously well presenting to the ED for respiratory distress. Two days ago, the 
patient's family noticed that his pulse ox was dramatically decreasing to 60-70s with 
exertion. His son states that even while resting, he was unable to get his pulse ox back up to 
baseline. His baseline pulse ox is 92-93% at rest and 85-90% while walking. They also 
noticed he required O2 at night while sleeping, which is unusual for him. While this was 
occurring, the patient's family noticed a sound during inspiration that was unusual for him. 
This sound was audible without need of a stethoscope. Prior to this, he and his family state 
that he was well. They proceeded to call his primary physician, and then came to the ED 
after no improvement. He has had no other symptoms and has not had any fever, chills, 
N/V.
Patient recently had ophthalmology visit for chronic dry eyes. He was instructed not to rub 
eyes in case anterior membrane is displaced. Patient's family requesting ophthalmology
consult as nurse rubbed secretions away from eye.
ED Course: Started CPAP, gave DuoNeb x2, terbutaline 0.25mg, magnesium 2g, solumedrol 
125 mg in EMS; CXR showed evidence of right pneumothorax, and so, chest tube 
thoracostomy was done to correct it. Patient continued on supplemental oxygen.
PMH:
IPF
GERD
Chronic dry eyes
SURGICAL HISTORY:
L-sided inguinal hernia repair
HOME MEDICATIONS:
Ofev 10mg three times weekly (Monday, Wednesday, Friday)
Pantoprazole 40 mg once daily
Atorvastatin 10 mg at bedtime 
ALLERGIES:
NKDA
No allergies to food, latex, etc. 
Submitted Tuesday 4/12/2022 2:25 pm
FAMILY HISTORY:
Brother died from IPF in the 1990s
Son and daughter are alive and well without health problems 
Patient’s parents are deceased, unknown cause of death
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Tobacco: Never smoker
Alcohol: None
Drugs: Never
Job: Retired engineer
Lives with wife, son, daughter-in-law, and granddaughter 
VITALS: 
T: 97.1 degrees F
HR: 112 bpm
BP: 118/75 mmHg
RR: 21 breaths/minute 
fiO2: 60%
PHYSICAL EXAM:
General: Dressed in hospital gown; appears to be in mild respiratory distress; cachectic; 
chest tube in right-sided 5th intercostal space
Head: Normocephalic, no evidence of trauma, tenderness, or lesions
Eyes: Not assessed 
Ears: Not assessed
Nose: Not assessed
Mouth and throat: Not assessed 
Neck: No JVD, carotid bruits, adenopathy, thyromegaly; trachea midline
Lymph nodes: No lymphadenopathy 
Chest/Lungs: Bibasilar rales, coarse breath sounds with relatively decreased breath sounds 
at right upper lung
Heart: Regular S1 and S2, PMI is nondisplaced, regular rate and rhythm; no S3, no S4, no 
rubs or murmurs
GI: Soft, nondistended abdomen, nontender to palpation, normoactive bowel sounds; no 
organomegaly
Extremities: No cyanosis, clubbing, pitting edema
Neurologic/developmental: The patient was oriented to time, place, and person; CN 2-12 
intact; sensation, motor, reflexes not assessed
LABS:
WBC: 18.9 
Troponin T High Sensitivity: 27 ng/L
Sodium: 129 mmol/L
Chloride: 93 mmol/L
Glucose: 154 mg/dL
Absolute Neutrophil Count Auto: 11.600 
Absolute Lymphocyte Count Auto: 5.240 
Absolute Monocyte Count Auto: 1.840 
Submitted Tuesday 4/12/2022 2:25 pm
IMAGING:
Initial CXR showed R pneumothorax
Follow-up CXR showed right chest tube with marked reexpansion of right lung; smaller 
moderate residual right apical lateral pneumothorax; diffuse bilateral interstitial infiltrates. 
ASSESSMENT & PLAN:
The patient is a 68YO M with a significant PMH of IPF treated with Ofev and 2L O2 who 
presented to the RWJUH ED in respiratory distress. Two days ago, the patient's family 
noticed that his pulse ox was dramatically decreasing to 60-70s with exertion. His son 
states that even while resting, he was unable to get his pulse ox back up to baseline. His 
baseline pulse ox is 92-93% at rest and 85-90% while walking. They also noticed he 
required O2 at night while sleeping, which is unusual for him. While this was occurring, the 
patient's family noticed a sound during inspiration that was unusual for him. They 
proceeded to call his primary physician and then came to the ED after no improvement. 
Initial CXR showed evidence of right pneumothorax, which was subsequently corrected 
with closed thoracostomy.
Problem #1: Right Pneumothorax s/p Thoracostomy
Currently on 6L NC - continue supplemental oxygen
Continue home medications for IPF
Consult pulmonology – appreciate recommendations 
Problem #2: Elevated Troponins
Repeat troponins
Monitor EKG
Problem #3: Leukocytosis
Obtain UA
Continue to monitor 
Problem #4: Chronic Dry Eyes
Ophthalmology on consult - appreciate recommendations 
Start oxoflacin ointment
Problem #5: IPF
Continue home medications (Ofev)
Contact outpatient pulmonologist for records
Problem #6: GERD
Continue home medications (Pantoprazole)
Problem #7: Hypercholesterolemia
Continue home medications (Atorvastatin)
FENP: None / Replete PRN / Diet: Regular / Enoxaparin subQ
Code status: Full Code
Dispo: Med/Surg