
I am very grateful that you sent this H&P so promptly. It will enable me to meet my self-imposed deadlines regarding my
administrative/didactic responsibilities.
My comments are as follows:
1. It is wonderful that you have given the duration of the chief complaint right up front.
2. It is wonderful that you have identified the informant and have stated her reliability upr fron and clearly.
3. The HPI is as close to perfect as I have seen in the last several years! It is altogether chronological and begins with
her status at the onset of the HPI. It is not just a narrative of the chief complaint but, rather, a cogent narrative of the
present illness. It is excellent.
4. I want to mention specifically for praise that you gave a quantitative statement of her weight loss. That tells the reader
a lot about the relative seriousness of this illness.
5. The ROS is exactly as it should be. My one suggestion is that the osteoarticular symptoms probably should be
appended to the HPI, as one of the manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease (which may precede the GI symptoms!)
is arthritis. It is quite possible that her joint symptoms are an integral part of her Crohn's disease.
6. The PMH and PSH need only have said "see HPI".
7. You included everything in the FH that you should have. Bravo!
8. Needless to say, I am delighted that you gave the heart rhythm together with the heart rate in the Vitals.
9. I am pleased that you looked for conjunctival pallor.
10. I am delighted that you are calling it hepatojugular reflux and not reflex!
11. I am delighted that you percussed the chest. Did you, perhaps, percuss the abdomen also?
12. It would be more complete to describe her abdominal scars.
13. It would be more complete to state the actual liver span.
14. In this patient, the MCV is a critically important part of the CBC. Because the terminal ileum is where vitamin B12 is
absorbed, patients such as this may not absorb this nutrient and the first clue would be a rise in the MCV.
15. Your assessment is exemplary for its focus and conciseness without sacrificing necessary detail.
16. Your discussion of the main problem is superb and I am pleased that you included bridging her with steroids to get her
through this acute crisis.
17. Your EBM is EXACTLY as it should be: relevant and practical without being pedantic.
 the growth that is evident in this H&P is a testament to your diligence, intelligence, and academic curiosity. You
should feel a real sense of accomplishment.
It has been an honor to have the opportunity to teach you and interact with you. As I mentioned tonight on the phone, I will
gladly provide one of the letters supporting your residency applications. Just send me the documents that will help me to
know a little more about you as a person.
Sincerely,
