
Having carefully reviewed your fifth H&P, I have my usual comments, many of the laudatory and a few with constructive
suggestions. They are as follows:
1. It is great that you give the informants and their reliability. But in the intro you speak of the husband and elsewhere
you speak of the "partner". While the two may be the same, it might have been better to use one term consistently.
2. It is great that you included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. The HPI that you wrote is excellent.
4. It might have added some insight to state the duration of time between the two instances of her use of TPN. You only
say "later" but not how much later.
5. (For the record, the scleroderma doctor is Dr. Hsu, not Su.)
6. Much of the PMH is actually part of the HPI and all you needed to say was "see HPI" as past history and present
illness are mutually exclusive. Something can't really be part of both.
7. But in the PMH it would have been more informative to give more details about the arthritis that she has.
8. Much of the PSH is also really part of the HPI. Even the appendectomy and cholecystectomy are relevant to the HPI if
she has had small bowel obstructions that could be related to adhesions from prior surgery.
9. In the Family History, it would be more complete to include the ages of the children; but I commend you for including
the children in the Family History.
10. I commend you for specifying the type of reactions to the allergens that you list.
11. Much of what you have in the ROS is really HPI, not just the GI items.
12. (This should have been mentioned earlier: I commend you for specifying the amount of weight loss that she has had.)
13. I don't believe I have ever seen an adult with a BMI so low!
14. Be aware that there are other terms to describe someone who is "emaciated" which are more "medical". They are
"cachectic" and "wasted" (although your generation uses "wasted" in a different sense!)
15. The percussion note of tympany (which I commend you for remembering) is described as "tympanitic". "Tympanic"
refers to the tympanum, the eardrum.
16. In reporting the EKG findings, your state that there is a "normal axis deviation". If it is normal it isn't deviated. I think
you just meant to say "normal axis".
17. I do not believe that tissue transglutaminase is used for diagnosing Crohn's disease. If I am not mistaken, it is used
for evaluating celiac disease.
18. Although it is true that macrocytic anemia is seen in folic acid deficiency, it is also a hallmark of B12 deficiency, and
this patient should be worked up for that. Is it possible that her colon surgery also involved her terminal ileum, the site of
B12 absorption?
19. But overall your Assessment and Plan reflect your usual thoroughness and thoughtfulness. It is really very good.
20. And your EBM is likewise right on target and addresses an important part of this patient's problems.
you are showing excellent growth in these few weeks. My chief regret is that my time with you is nearing its end. Time
with a student like you is like closet space: We can always use more!
Thank you for getting this to me so promptly.
