
Having carefully read your fifth H&P, I have my usual list of comments, many laudatory and some intended to foster your
continue growth:
1. It is excellent that you state clearly the informant and his reliability.
2. It is also excellent that you indicate the duration of the chief complaint.
3. The overall construction of the narrative of the HPI is excellent, nicely chronological and with all information needed to
enable the reader to arrive at a logical diagnosis.
4. It is excellent that you indicate that he was in his "usual state of health" when this all started; but it would be more
complete to indicate what his usual state of health was. There are several good ways of saying this:
"...usual state of good health..."
"...usual state of apparent good health..." (which is unassailable, so I like to use this one)
"...usual state of stable health..." (also unassailable)
"...was in failing health due to (and then you may wish to state the conditions that make this true)
"...usual state of stable health, with well-controlled hypertension and diabetes..." (or whatever concurrent
conditions may be present)
And there are many other ways you can say this. The point is, it is important for the reader to know what the patient's
"usual" state of health actually is, to get an idea of the baseline condition of the patient before the events of the present
illness began. Sometimes the present illness actually begins long before the current presentation. For example, if
someone comes in with lung cancer, I usually begin with "...he was well at age 16 when he began to smoke cigarettes and
he continued to smoke for the next 40 years, one pack per day, until the present. Six months prior to admission he
developed a dry cough which became productive of mucoid sputum one month prior to admission. Three days prior to
admission he began to note streaks of blood in his sputum. In addition, over the past six months he has noted an
unexplained 20 pound weight loss." (This is just an example of a present illness with events that began long before the
onset of the chief complaint. It is important to distinguish between the history of the chief complaint and the history of the
actual present illness.)
5. You may want to try to be a little more careful with spelling: In one instance you say "medical" when you must have
meant "medial". (7th line of the first paragraph of the HPI) It would be a good idea to proofread what you write before you
submit it. You need to be able to defend every syllable of what you write, lest your credibility and the credibility of the
document be reduced. This is particularly important if, heaven forbid, you are ever sued.
6. It is fine that you did not repeat in the ROS what is already given above in the HPI.
7. Strictly speaking, the Achilles tendon repair is an integral part of the HPI and is not really past surgical history.
8. I commend you for including the ages of individuals mentioned in the family history. Keep up this good practice.
9. It is excellent that you probed deeply for a family history of a clotting diathesis.
10. It is a good practice to describe the cardiac rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs, as you did.
11. I commend you for describing the patient's respiratory effort.
12. It is, to me, amazing that with such extensive pulmonary emboli he has such a high oxygen saturation.
13. I commend you for percussing the chest. If you percussed anteriorly over the heart, (which it appears that you did),
one finding that can be mentioned is the left border of cardiac dullness, which is a measure of cardiac size. It is very, very
old-fashioned and almost no one does this any more. (What is done, however, is to note the position of the "PMI" (point of
maximal impulse), which can be expressed by the intercostal space and how far to the left of the mid-sternal line it is. It's
not perfect but it can be useful.)
14. I commend your for using the correct term, "tympanitic", for the percussion note over the bowels.
15. It would have been more complete to note the presence or absence of palpable venous cords over the lower extremity
veins.
16. I commend you, to reinforce your good practice, for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in expressing the
patient's reporting of symptoms.
17. Your assessment and plan are written nicely. I think that the elevated WBC is minimal, really, and is, as you suggest,
just an acute phase reactant.
18. I'm glad you gave the EBM material, but it is very important to cite the literature to which you are referring, so that the
reader can go back to the article if desired. It is just part of good scholarship to specify the references you use.
19. I think autocorrect got you when you wrote "submissive" when you meant "submassive".
20. In that paragraph, you did not state what the conclusions were regarding submassive PE and its consequences.
this is an extremely good write-up. An area for improvement is how you report and apply the references that you
use in the EBM section for this to be maximally useful to someone who reads what you wrote. But you are definitely going
3/17/22, 5:48 PM Re: H&P 5

in the right direction and this is from a starting point and prior levels that were very good to begin with.
I look forward to your sixth H&P. Also, I am delighted that you turned this one in on Thursday afternoon, giving me plenty
of time to get it back to you in a timely manner.
Best regards,
