
Internal Medicine
H&P #6
Reliability: The patient was a reliable source of information and provided a detailed 
history. 
Chief Complaint: “My stomach has been killing me since this morning.”
HPI: The patient is a 31YO M with a recent history of alcohol-induced pancreatitis 
presenting to the RWJUH ED with abdominal pain. He was recently discharged from 
RWJUH 2 weeks ago after being treated for alcohol-induced pancreatitis. He was put on 
bowel rest with IVF and pain management during his stay. He was advised to abstain from 
alcohol upon discharge after drinking 3 beers daily for one year. This morning, the patient 
woke up with abdominal pain localized in the epigastrium. He describes the pain as sharp 
and states that it radiates to the right side of his abdomen and down to his belly button. He 
explains that this pain is different from the pain he felt on his previous admission in that 
this pain is more significant on the right, whereas last time, it was more significant on the 
left. He states that the pain does not radiate to his back and is not associated with position 
changes such as leaning forward. He explains that any movement makes the pain worse 
and that lying still minimizes pain somewhat. He quantifies the pain as a 6-9/10 in severity, 
which is similar to what he experienced last time. He has not had any alcoholic drinks since 
before his last admission. He reports some nausea, but has had no vomiting, diarrhea, 
constipation, chest pain, shortness of breath, fever, chills. He last ate yesterday at lunch 
time and had a bagel, muffin, grapes, and a yogurt without difficulty. This morning, he 
tolerated water and states that he is even hungry now. His last bowel movement was 
yesterday and was of normal caliber without blood or change in color. He has not had any 
recent sick contacts. Upon questioning what he thinks may be happening, the patient feels 
that it may be pancreatitis again, but is concerned because it does not feel the same as last 
time.
ED Course: Received 1000 ml bolus NS, one dose of ondansetron 4 mg, one dose of 
morphine 4 mg, and one dose of ketorolac 15 mg. He had labs drawn, which were 
significant for an elevated lipase. He had a RUQ US which showed evidence of biliary 
sludge, hepatic steatosis, and did not visualize the pancreas well.
ROS: 
General: Negative for weight loss, change in appetite, change in energy
Skin: Negative for rashes, infections, hair and nail problems, other lesions
Eyes: Negative for acuity, strabismus, infection, irritation
Ears: Negative for hearing, pain, discharge, infections
Nose, mouth, throat: Negative for epistaxis, discharge, nasal polyps, snoring, obstruction or 
apnea during sleep, pain, tooth or gum problems, other lesions, dysphagia, odynophagia 
Cardio-respiratory: Negative for chest pain and shortness of breath, productive cough, 
frequent colds/pneumonias, wheezing, stridor, exercise tolerance, excessive fatigue, 
palpitations, hypertension, cyanosis
Submitted Sun 2022 05 01 ~8:00 pm
Gastrointestinal: Positive for abdominal pain and nausea; negative for vomiting, diarrhea, 
constipation, rectal bleeding, other stool abnormalities, jaundice
Genitourinary: Negative for dysuria, frequency, urgency, polyuria, enuresis, infections, 
irritation, discharge
Hematopoietic: Negative for lymphadenopathy, anemia, pallor, bleeding, bruising
Neuromuscular: Negative for headache, arthritis, arthralgias, myalgias, weakness, paralysis, 
tremors, tics, chorea, athetosis, ataxia, loss of consciousness, seizures
Psychiatric: Negative for extremes of mood, depression, abnormal thought process, other
PMH:
Recent history of pancreatitis secondary to alcohol use managed with fluids, pain 
medications (Dilaudid), and slowly advancing diet
PSH:
Laparoscopic appendectomy in 2004
Home Medications:
None
Allergies:
NKDA
Family History:
Mother and father are alive and healthy
Social History: 
Tobacco: 1 pack per week for 3 years, quit 9-10 years ago
Alcohol: 3 beers per day since March 2021, stopped after recent discharge for pancreatitis 
2 weeks ago
Drugs: Never
Job: Oncology clerk at RWJUH; does not find job to be particularly stressful
Physical Exam:
Vital signs:
 T = 98 degrees F
 HR = 63 bpm
 BP = 147/94
 RR = 18
 SaO2 = 97% on RA
General appearance: Appears to be in no acute distress, dressed in hospital gown
Skin: Warm to touch, dry, intact; no erythema, rashes, lesions, ulcers; scar in right lower 
quadrant and at umbilicus 
Head: Normocephalic, no evidence of trauma, tenderness, or lesions
Eyes: No scleral icterus; pupils equal round and reactive to light and accommodation
Submitted Sun 2022 05 01 ~8:00 pm
Ears: Not assessed 
Nose: Not assessed
Mouth and throat: Not assessed
Neck: No JVD, carotid bruits, adenopathy, thyromegaly; trachea midline
Lymph nodes: No lymphadenopathy 
Chest/Lungs: Resonant to percussion bilaterally; clear to ausculatation bilaterally; 
symmetric chest expansion; no accessory muscle use; no tenderness on palpation; no 
wheezing, crackles, rhonchi
Heart: Regular S1 and S2; no murmurs, rubs, gallops; PMI is nondisplaced, regular rate and 
rhythm; no S3, no S4
Abdomen: Soft abdomen that is tender to palpation in epigastric region with radiation 
down to umbilicus; normoactive bowel sounds; liver span = 9 cm
Extremities: No cyanosis, clubbing, pitting edema; peripheral pulses present bilaterally
Neurologic/developmental: The patient was oriented to time, place, and person; CN 2-12 
intact; sensation, motor, reflexes not assessed
Labs: 
139 | 102 | 5
--------------------< 127 Ca: 9.0 
4.2 | 25.7 | 0.7
CBC:
 WBC = 8.8
 Hb = 12.9 with MCV = 101.3
 Hct = 37.3
 PLT = 268
LFTs:
 AST = 88 
 ALT = 86
 ALP = 99
 Bili = 0.7 with direct = <0.2
 Protein = 7.2
 Albumin = 4.6
 Lipase = 438
Imaging:
 Right Upper Quadrant US: showed evidence of biliary sludge, hepatic steatosis 
which is largely unchanged from previous admission. Pancreas was not well 
visualized
 Pending CT of abdomen
Submitted Sun 2022 05 01 ~8:00 pm
Assessment and Plan: 
The patient is a 31YO M with a recent history of alcohol-induced pancreatitis presenting to 
the RWJUH ED with abdominal pain. He was recently discharged from RWJUH 2 weeks ago 
after being treated for alcohol-induced pancreatitis. He was put on bowel rest with IVF and 
pain management during his stay. He was advised to abstain from alcohol upon discharge 
after drinking 3 beers daily for one year. This morning, the patient woke up with abdominal 
pain localized in the epigastrium. The most likely diagnosis is acute pancreatitis.
Problem #1: Abdominal Pain likely secondary to pancreatitis
DDx: acute pancreatitis, necrotizing pancreatitis, pancreatic abscess, pancreatic 
pseudocyst, chronic pancreatitis
 The most likely diagnosis is acute pancreatitis as the patient has an elevated lipase, 
acute onset of epigastric abdominal pain and nausea. 
 Necrotizing pancreatitis and pancreatic abscess/pseudocyst are less likely as patient 
is afebrile and has a normal white count
Abdominal pain is localized in epigastric region with some radiation to the RUQ
Lipase is elevated at 438
RUQ US could not well visualize the pancreas  obtain CT to get more details of the 
pancreas and surrounding structures
Continue IVF
Keep NPO  can advance diet back to solids as tolerated
 Reference: Meng, W.-B., Li, X., Li, Y.-M., Zhou, W.-C., & Zhu, X.-L. (2011, October 
7). Three initial diets for management of mild acute pancreatitis: A meta-analysis. 
World journal of gastroenterology. Retrieved May 1, 2022, from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3208370/
Provide appropriate pain and nausea management – Dilaudid 0.4 mg q6h PRN for pain; 
Ondansetron 4 mg PRN for nausea 
Problem #2: Alcohol Use Disorder
Consult Peer Recovery Services 
Continue to monitor and assess necessity of CIWA protocol initiation
Provide thiamine and folic acid supplementation
Problem #3: Macrocytic Anemia
DDx: anemia secondary to folate deficiency in setting of alcohol use, B12 deficiency, liver 
disease
Hb = 12.9 with MCV = 101.3
Obtain folate, B12 levels  if low, provide supplementation 
Obtain reticulocyte count, haptoglobin, LDH to rule out any evidence of hemolysis