
I have read your second H&P very carefully and my comments follow. Although this write-up has many strengths, it appears, again, to have
been written in haste (despite the rather late submission date). I will point out areas of concern as well as affirm the strong areas:
1. Again, I am pleased that you indicate the reliability of the informants.
2. Again, I am pleased that you gave the duration of the chief complaint right up front.
3. A major concern is that this is a history of significant heart disease, the beginning of which preceded the current episode by several
years. You give minimal information about the beginning of the heart problems and how they evolved. Your make cursory mention of some
events (CABG, PCIs, NSTEMI) but don't even say when these happened and you give no details about them. Had you done that, it would
have been much easier to make sense of the chronology of the illness and the extent of the current episode. Instead, you give a very good
summary of the events in the two weeks prior to admission; but without the antecedent history, these have no context. Among other things,
you mention a murmur; and if she has valvular heart disease, that might contribute to her congestive heart failure and would have major
therapeutic implications. If you truly accept the authority of the New England Journal of Medicine, then you would begin the history of the
present illness at the beginning of the present illness; and risk factors for this particular present illness, such as diabetes and hypertension,
would be woven into the fabric of the HPI narrative in their chronologic place.
4. When mentioning chest pain, it is conventional and more complete to include where in the chest the pain occurs.
5. It is very good that you included quantitation of the weight gain.
6. The absence of any mention of palpitations in this history is a significant omission. If she had paroxysms of atrial fibrillation, for
example, it would help to understand why she is getting enoxaparin, which is otherwise unexplained in the document you have written.
7. You have used "denies" in several places. Please try to avoid this as well as the other confrontational words such as "admit" and
"claim", in addition to "endorse".
8. It would have been more complete to indicate the route by which Lasix was administered in the ED.
9. Do you have any information about the end of "perfect" control of the diabetes? And how poorly has it been controlled since it went out
of good control? This is important because poor control of diabetes is a risk factor for the various vascular complications of diabetes,
including coronary artery disease.
10. All of the cardiac information that you have put in PMH and PSH should be integrated into the HPI, for reasons given above.
11. It is very good that you have given the manifestations of her allergies.
12. In the social history, it would be valuable to say where she was born and how long she has been in the United States. For example, if
she were from Mexico, could there be an element of Chagas disease contributing to her congestive heart failure? And regardless where in
the Spanish-speaking world she is from, it would be useful to know if there is any possibility that she might have rheumatic heart disease.
(She does, after all, have a heart murmur.)
13. The occupational history should be an integral part of the social history.
14. It is conventional to include a description of the rhythm together with the heart rate, with the vitals.
15. Her respiratory rate is quite tachypneic. It would be informative to note whether her respirations are labored.
16. It is WONDEFUL that you measured the extent of the neck vein distension. Was hepatojugular reflux present? Was there Kussmaul's
sign? These are important in congestive heart failure.
17. Did this patient have an S3 or S4? If not, it would be relevant to mention their absence specifically.
18. It is not sufficient simply to mention the presence of a murmur. It is necessary to say where it is loudest, whether it radiates and if it does
the direction of the radiation, and, its timing in its part of the cardiac cycle (i.e., holosystolic, early systolic, late systolic). Also, the contour of
the murmur should be described: For example, is it crescendo/decrescendo? If you give enough information about a murmur on physical
exam, you may well be able to predict the actual functional and anatomic valvular abnormality (if it is from a valve; because septal defects
may also have murmurs).
19. All chests should be percussed, but especially when there are abnormalities of the breath sounds as was the case with this patient. And
it would have been more complete to elicit tactile fremitus and egophony.
20. It would have been more complete and informative to give the liver span measurement.
21. It is conventional and very informative to indicate how high up the lower extremity pitting edema extends. You had, in fact, done this on
the first H&P you wrote.
22. In the labs you give a very low calcium. Be aware that this is uninterpretable without albumin and phosphorus. (And phosphorus is not
usually included in the CMP.)
23. Your CBC did not include the MCV or the RDW. It is difficult to interpret an anemia without these numbers. (In primitive times [my
training days] we actually looked at peripheral blood to get an idea of the cause of anemia.) If this patient is fluid overloaded, her low
hemoglobin could be dilutional. But we can't speculate without more complete data.
24. Your summary statement in the Assessment/Plan is very good.
25. But your discussion of the management of her decompensated heart failure is not as strong as I would have expected. You make no
mention of the valve/murmur and you only obliquely allude to the likelihood that she has progression of her underlying disease. Her ejection
fraction was extremely low only a few weeks earlier. One of the indications for an implanted defibrillator is CHF with an ejection fraction as
low as this patient's is.
26. I agree that thyrotoxicosis is an important potential contributor to congestive heart failure; but that is usually high-output failure, not
failure associated with an ejection fraction of 25%. Moreover, her heart rate is not so rapid as one would expect with hyperthyroidism.
27. Your EBM question is interesting and is relevant to this patient.
given the time it took you to turn in this write-up, I honestly expected it to be better, because I know that you are capable of better work
than this. Please try not to do these write-ups in such haste. Give yourself enough time to complete them in a timely fashion without having
to rush to get them done in time. I am eager to see your next H&P.
