
As mentioned earlier at the Clinical Challenge session, I have reviewed your second H&P and have several comments.
Overall, it has many strengths. There are some areas for improvement, but that is to be expected. (Indeed, after all these
years I still feel that there is room for improvement in what I do.) My comments are as follows:
1. It is very good that you gave the duration of the chief complaint right up front.
2. It is very good that you identify the informant and his reliability right up front.
3. The HPI is very well constructed, and gives a good, clear picture of the evolution of the events. There are a couple of
things you may wish to consider to make it even stronger:
a. Indicating the length of time that he "feels tired more easily" could affect the differential diagnosis.
b. In addition to asking about gross blood in the stool, it is helpful to ask about the color of the stool. He might then tell
you it had been black but might not know that this could indicate the presence of blood in the stool.
c. Your statement that the ED lab data suggested a "possible parasitic infection" is too vague and, to a certain extent,
is a little misleading. If someone in the lab, on looking at the peripheral smear, had reported Babesia-like organisms, then
that warrants specific mention. Otherwise, the lab data that you appended to the HPI do not really suggest a parasite.
d. It would have been useful to state specifically whether he swims in fresh water, especially bodies of water with
water fowl in them, and whether he has swum in fresh water outside the United States.
4. It is excellent that you included his children in the FH; but it would be more complete to include their ages and health
status.
5. It is very good that you included the ages of his parents. I am assuming that "CRC" means colo-rectal carcinoma, but
it might be safer not to assume that all readers would know that. I doubt that this is one of the approved abbreviations in
the record department of RWJUH.
5a. Siblings are part of the FH.
6. It is excellent that you mentioned the emotional stresses that he is experiencing.
7. I note that the heart rate of 103 is a prime number. Did you actually spend a full minute counting his pulse, or is this
from a monitor?
8. He is tachypneic at 17. It would be informative to indicate if his respirations are labored or not.
9. I commend you for commenting on the regularity of the heart rhythm.
10. I had mentioned to you in the prior email that it is hepatojugular reflux, not reflex. But you had not seen that email
before you wrote this H&P.
11. You described the heart sounds as "faint". Was this because of a very thick chest wall? Or were they actually
"distant" because of, for example, severe air trapping in patients with advanced COPD. Sometimes heart sounds are
distant because of a pericardial effusion, although often they are described as "muffled" in that circumstance.
12. Please form the habit of percussing chests and abdomens.
13. If you can't feel the liver edge, you still might be able to detect the liver span by the "scratch" test. I will attach a set of
slides to this email that describes this test.
14. I think that when you mention "skins" in Extremities, you may have meant "shins".
15. In reporting the CBC, it is often very informative to include the MCV and the RDW. And this is a patient for whom the
manual differential is critically important, as is examination of the peripheral smear. These are never unimportant, but with
a patient who is pancytopenic they are especially important.
16. Your assessment, overall, is quite good. But be aware that for a 61 year-old otherwise healthy male a hemoglobin of
12.9 is not normal.
17. Although the transaminases are somewhat elevated, the alkaline phosphatase is more impressively abnormal. He
may have hepatocellular edema causing the elevated alk phos. You imply that these numbers suggest a parasitic
infection, but I do not agree with that at all. There may have been a parasite (e.g., Babesia); but the lab data as you
recorded them do not at all suggest a parasite, neither heminthic or otherwise. In New Jersey, one may think of Babesia in
patients with thrombocytopenia, but that is really the only parasite that is even remotely suggested by the lab data.
18. Your concentration on parasites in your discussion is not based on any of the facts of this patient's story or physical
exam or lab data. Schistosomiasis that involves the liver requires exposure to fresh water that is inhabited by specific
species of snails that are found in very specific parts of the world. Leishmaniasis has, likewise, very specific geographic
distribution and depends on being bitten by particular fly species. Echinococcosis only exists in populations with exposure
to canines and ungulates in the same environment. None of these conditions apply to what you recorded in the H&P. Be
very careful not to overinterpret any data, but especially laboratory data without a clinical context. I really wanted to take
some extra time discussing this with you after the Clinical Challenge session but you evidently had other obligations.
this H&P does show satisfactory growth, especially when compared with the original version of your first H&P. The
H&P itself is pretty good, although I do note several areas for improvement (which is to be expected at any stage in your
7/7/2021 Re: H&P #2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
education but especially at this early stage). Be stimulated by my comments to improve and to grow as a clinician.
I look forward to your next H&P, which, I am confident, will continue to show growth and improvement.
