
Your third H&P has many, many strengths! My comments:
1. I commend you for giving the reliability of the informant.
2. I commend you for explicitly stating the duration of the chief complaint.
3. The two items of past history that you used at the beginning of the HPI are extremely relevant to the HPI and I want to
affirm the astuteness of your including these exactly where you did.
4. You avoided "admit" "claim" and "deny" as well as "endorse" in the history! Bravo!
5. The one and only thing you may have wanted to add into the HPI is whether the weight loss of 30 pounds two years
earlier was explained or unexplained. I suspect that if it was two years earlier it was probably unexplained and not due to
some ominous underlying illness.
6. In the past surgical history, it would be more complete to indicate why he had an adrenalectomy.
7. You have avoided repeating in, for example, the ROS, what is already mentioned earlier. This is excellent.
8. It might have been relevant to include the use of aspirin, even in small doses, in the HPI in addition to putting it into the
list of meds.
9. It is important to state explicitly the type of allergic manifestation under allergies.
10. It would be more complete to give the age of family members, whether alive or dead.
11. Children, whether or not there are any, should be mentioned in the family history.
12. The absence of family history of bleeding diatheses would be appropriate to include in the HPI, in this instance.
13. Although the smoking history is remote, it is more complete to detail it a little more: when began, for example.
14. Given the history of hematochezia, for the vitals it would be more complete to include orthostatics.
15. Under HEENT you may have made a typo with "To" tenderness in the paranasal sinuses.
16. I COMMEND YOU FOR PERCUSSING THE CHEST!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17. It would be more complete to state whether the murmur radiates and where it is loudest. This applies to all murmurs.
18. When a patient is anemic, it is more informative to include the MCV and the RDW, which are usually given with the
other data in the CBC.
19. Your assessment and plan are wonderfully constructed and written. (Although I think that ulcerative colitis starting in
the ninth decade would be very unlikely.)
20. Although I don't think Heyde syndrome is very likely so long after successful aortic valve replacement, I think it is
wonderful that you have included it as a consideration. It is very easy to overlook and can have dire consequences.
21. Your EBM is, as before, very well applied to this specific patient and his unique problem of active bleeding with a
strong indication for anticoagulation.
this is yet another superb H&P and shows growth from your prior work, which was itself truly excellent. Your future in
our profession is very bright, based on what I have observed of your work.
Looking forward to H&P #4!
