
NEVER have I had a student who has submitted written work as promptly as you have over these weeks, and absolutely
never have I received a write-up on the Sunday of the week it is due. I am especially grateful for this because it really lets
me plan my time most effectively.
Having read your sixth H&P, I am delighted, absolutely delighted with the progress you have made. It took me very little
time to read this H&P because there are so few areas for which I have suggestions for improvement. I do have some
comments meant to affirm the strengths that this write-up shows, and these, plus a few constructive suggestions, follow:
1. It is excellent that you indicate the informant and state so clearly the reliability of the informant.
2. It is excellent that you indicate the duration of the chief complaint.
3. The narrative of the HPI is absolutely outstanding: It is appropriately detailed and yet, as is one of your greatest
strengths, it does not waste a single word. It is chronological and articulately written and logically composed, making it
almost impossible not to arrive at the correct diagnosis. This is exactly what an ideal HPI should do.
4. Even the ED Course paragraph is superb. (By the way, the pressure needed to perform ultrasound imaging is
substantial and probably caused significant discomfort, and this may have contributed to the inability to visualize the
pancreas well.) I believe that the biliary sludge has diagnostic significance and I will come back to that below.
5. In the ROS, perhaps what you have included in the General and GI sections should be incorporated into the HPI.
6. The same is true for what you have included in PMH. Strictly speaking, something can't really be in both the PMH and
the HPI, if the HPI is inclusive enough.
7. In the Family History, it is ideal to include the ages of those mentioned. Also, siblings and children, if any, should be
included in the Family History.
8. You recorded the smoking history perfectly: You didn't just give pack-years! (And the alcohol history was already
given in the HPI. Some would simply say "Alcohol: See HPI")
9. It is my preference to include a description of the cardiac rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs. There are
textbooks that recommend this.
10. I am thrilled that you percussed the chest!
11. It is more accurate to say that the rhythm is regular and that the rate is either normal, rapid, or slow. "Regular rate and
rhythm" is written reflexively by many people but it is not really a correct way to record these findings.
12. I am ecstatic that you recorded the liver span. In this patient it is especially important but it is always advisable to do
this.
13. It would have been more complete to indicate that the spleen was not palpable, especially in this patient (whose liver
was abnormal on imaging).
14. It is absolutely wonderful that you recorded the MCV. Indeed, in this patient it may have had differential diagnostic
significance in determining the cause of his anemia.
15. I am a little surprised that the team did not include an alcohol level in the blood work on admission.
16. Assuming that he did not drink alcohol to precipitate this episode, it would have been appropriate to include the biliary
sludge in the differential diagnosis of the cause of the pancreatitis, and also to mention the caliber of the bile ducts on
imaging if this could be determined. It is possible that he had at least transient common bile duct obstruction that could
have precipitated this episode of acute pancreatitis.
17. Your Assessment and Plan are, as you have made me come to expect from you, absolutely excellent, perhaps better
than I have come to expect of a student at your level. I am very impressed with your level of clinical reasoning.
18. Dietary management of a patient with acute pancreatitis is critical to the overall care and your choice of a reference for
EBM is, as your generation has taught me to say, "spot on"!
19. I am very pleased that you want to work up the cause of the anemia as you have written. Too often anemia is
accepted as a consequence of chronic disease. It is indeed likely, as you have indicated, that folate deficiency is involved.
Alcohol inhibits the absorption of folate from the diet.
this H&P is superb and shows excellent growth. It has been a privilege to teach you and interact with you. If you
would be kind enough to send me your CV, I would like to write a letter supporting your residency applications. If you have
any other documents that would tell me a little more about you as a person, that you would be willing to share with me, I
would like to see these also, perhaps including the essay that accompanied your medical school applications.
I wish you every possible success as you move forward.
Sincerely,
