
CC: Abdominal pain and hematochezia for one week
Informant: Patient. She is reliable.
HPI: The patient is a 23 year old female that was otherwise healthy until diagnosed with 
Crohn’s disease 7 years ago in 2015. Her diagnosis was followed by an ileocecectomy 
with an ileocolonic anastomosis in 2016. She was placed on Remicade and 
mercaptopurine and had good control of her Crohn’s disease with no subsequent 
hospitalizations prior to today. Her last colonoscopy was in 2016, which she reports 
showed minimal inflammation. She became concerned about immunosuppression 
during the COVID-19 pandemic and reports stopping the Remicade and 
mercaptopurine. Over the past month, she has noted increasing abdominal pain, 
especially in the RLQ. She has also noted a weight loss of approximately 10-15 pounds 
over the last two months. The pain has increased substantially in the last week and is 
worst with bowel movements, which she attributes to inflammation of chronic 
hemorrhoids. She describes the pain as a 10/10 and reports seeing frank blood in the 
toilet with defecation and large volume, watery stools that have increased in severity 
over the last week. She also reports occasional fevers and chills during the past week 
with increasing levels of fatigue. Prior to this past week she had no physical limitations 
and was able to perform her work in an ice cream shop. She also increasingly feels 
light headed and dizzy, especially when standing and with exertion. She does not 
report any recent sick contacts or travel and has been vaccinated against COVID-19.
ROS
 General: See HPI
 Neuro: See HPI. No numbness or tingling.
 HEENT: States no headache / sore throat / coryza / change in vision or hearing
 CV: States no chest pain or palpitations
 Pulm: States no SOB, pleuritic pain, or cough
 GI: See HPI
 GU: States no change in urination or pain with urination
 MSK: States chronic joint pain in both her knees, no other joint pain, no muscle 
pain
 Heme: States no easy bruising or nose bleeds
 Derm: States no rashes or skin changes
PMH
 Crohn’s disease diagnosed in 2015
Medications
 Remicade 5mg/kg q6 wks (stopped during the COVID19 pandemic)
 Mercaptopurine 50mg daily (stopped during the COVID19 pandemic)
Allergies
 None

PSH
 Ileocecectomy with ileocolonic anastomosis in 2016
FH
 Father had DM and IBD. Died two years ago in 60s.
 Mother had DM, pancreatic cancer and died in 60s this last February
 One older brother, age 26, with no known health issues
SH
 Lives with a roommate. Feels safe.
 Drinks alcohol socially, about 2-3 drinks per week
 Never used tobacco products. Occasional marijuana use of about 3 times per 
week. States it helps with her abdominal pain.
 Works as a server in an ice cream shop
Vitals
 BP 120/75
 HR 76 and regular rhythm 
 T 100.1F
 R 18, normal inspiratory effort
 SpO2 100% on RA
PE
 General: Patient is in no acute distress and answers appropriately
 Neuro: A&Ox3, CN II-XII are intact, motor and sensation grossly intact, no 
obvious FND 
 HEENT: EOMI, PERRLA, sclera anicteric, no conjunctival pallor, no signs or 
pharyngeal erythema, lesions, or ulcers
 Neck: Trachea is midline, no elevation in JVD or hepatojugular reflux, no 
palpable lymph nodes, could not palpate thyroid
 CV: Regular rate and regular rhythm, normal S1/S2 no murmurs, rubs, or gallops
 Lungs: Normal inspiratory effort. Lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no 
wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. Normal resonance to percussion bilaterally and in all 
fields.
 Abdominal: Soft and nondistended. Normal BS. Tender to palpation, especially 
in the RLQ. No rigidity. No evidence of hepatoslpenomegally.
 Extremities: Radial and DP and 2+/2+ and symmetric. Equal strength in upper 
extremities on flexion/extension of wrists and forearm. No signs of edema in 
shins bilaterally. Warm and well perfused. 
 Skin: No evidence of rashes, skin breakdown, or ulcers.
Beier Matthew H&P #6 submitted Monday 7/26/2021 8:30 pm
Labs
 CBC: WBC 11.5, Hb 12.9, Hct 40.6, Plt 397
 BMP: Na 133, Cl 94, K 4.3, Total CO2 22.3, Ca 8.8, Glucose 109
 CTAP: Acute Crohn’s flare involving the distal ileum with skip lesions involving 
the transverse colon to rectum. No signs of bowel obstruction.
Assessment: Pt is a 23 year old female with history of Crohn's disease s/p 
ileocecectomy presenting with abdominal pain and hematochezia for one week, 
following discontinuation of Remicade/methocaptopurine during the COVID19 
pandemic. On initial work up she is found to be mildly febrile at 100.1F and have a 
slightly elevated WBC at 11.4. Her CTAP is consistent with an acute Crohn’s flare.
#abdominal pain with hematochezia
 Patient is most likely presenting with an acute Crohn’s flare following 
discontinuation of her maintenance medications of Remicade and 
methocaptopurine. She is found to have a slightly elevated white count and to be 
mildly febrile and CTAP is strongly suggestive of a Crohn's flare. Infectious 
etiologies should be ruled out and blood cultures drawn, test for C. Diff, fecal 
leukocytes, and fecal calprotectin. Should consult with GI regarding 
management of Crohn’s and likely restarting her maintenance medications and 
possible colonoscopy. Will likely bridge with steroids for acute flare. Can treat 
pain and N/V with analgesics and anti-emetics.
Research
The patient’s concern about immunosuppression and the COVID19 pandemic is a very 
reasonable concern to have. I looked in the primary literature to see if there is any 
suggestion that Remicade or mercaptopurine are associated with more severe disease. 
Notably, one epidemiological study found that TNF alpha agents, such as Remicade, 
are not associated with more severe disease1
. Conversely, a study by the same group 
found that mercaptopurine, used as mono therapy or in combination with TNF agents, 
are associated with more severe disease2
. Severe disease in both studies was defined 
as ICU admission, requiring mechanical ventilation, and/or death. Mercaptopurine use 
had an adjusted odds ratio of 4 (95%CI 1.7, 9.6), suggesting significantly increased 
odds of severe COVID19 disease with its use.
1. Brenner EJ, Ungaro RC, Gearry RB, et al. Corticosteroids, But Not TNF 
Antagonists, Are Associated With Adverse COVID-19 Outcomes in Patients With 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Results From an International Registry. 
Gastroenterology. 2020;159(2):481-491.e483.
2. Ungaro RC, Brenner EJ, Gearry RB, et al. Effect of IBD medications on COVID19 outcomes: results from an international registry. Gut. 2021;70(4):725-732.