
Having reviewed your second H&P, submitted Friday evening at about 7:30, I have several comments, many laudatory and
some with suggestions for growth and/or improvement:
1. It is a convention that you should follow to start the write-up with the identity of the informant(s) and their reliability.
This gives the reader the opportunity to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is written, which is always very
important in assessing clinical information.
2. I commend you for including the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the complaint itself. This may have
significant impact on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint, which guides which questions are asked
to compose the history of present illness.
3. In the second line of the HPI you indicate "AVR" and later you clarify that this was a TAVR. It would have been a little
better to indicate that this was TAVR from the first mention of it.
4. The overall narrative of the history of present illness is nicely constructed and chronological.
5. It is extraordinary that a person in the late 8th decade is given an NSAID. Many do not advise this because of various
toxicities of this category of drug, especially renal damage. (But this is not a reflection on the quality of your work, just on
the medical advice that the patient received prior to your seeing him.)
6. This is a small issue, but in listing the medications, it would be useful to know how often he actually takes colchicine.
7. This, too, is a small issue: Although I do prefer "PTA" for events relating the the present illness or to the patient
himself/herself, you can use "ago" for events in the family history or elsewhere in the overall document. The importance of
following the chronology is really greatest in the history of present illness.
8. In the social history, last sentence, I note that you used "denies" and I ask that you please try to avoid this word as
well as "admit" "claim" and "endorse" in describing the patient's reporting of symptoms or activities.
9. I commend you for describing the cardiac rhythm together with the heart rate in the vital signs.
10. I am delighted that you percussed the chest!!!!! (By the way, if you want to use a single word to describe a normal
percussion finding in the chest, it is "resonant".)
11. I commend you for describing the liver size quantitatively. This enables subsequent examiners to compare their
findings with what you found on this occasion, so that progression or regression of the liver size can be followed. I am very
pleased that you percussed the abdomen. (The normal finding for percussion over a gas-filled bowel is "tympany" as it is a
higher pitch than the normal finding over the air-filled lung. The adjective is "tympanitic".)
12. It is excellent that you assessed straight leg raising. It would be more complete to indicate at what angle of elevation
pain is elicited. This enables comparison from exam to exam.
13. I personally think that one factor leading to this patient's bacteremia is that an inappropriate drug was used for his
dental prophylaxis. If he can't take penicillin, then he still would need a drug with good gram-positive and anaerobic
coverage. A second-line agent that I would have used is clindamycin. A macrolide would also be acceptable. A quinolone
is not, in my opinion.
14. Although it is probable that an opioid was needed to control his pain, be aware that constipation is a major side effect
of this class of drugs, and he is already affected by this symptom.
15. Given his splenomegaly seen on CT scan, hypersplenism should be considered in the differential diagnosis of his
thrombocytopenia. And, to me, with anemia and thrombocytopenia, it would not be unreasonable to pursue a bone
marrow biopsy, especially if you are including (appropriately) a plasma cell dyscrasia in the differential diagnosis.
I believe that this patient has endocarditis on his TAVR device and it may be very difficult to eradicate it without surgical
intervention. When I see you tomorrow I will be eager to have follow-up about this patient.
this H&P shows good improvement and growth. It disturbed me a bit that you submitted it so late (Friday evening)
and I hope that the next four write-ups will come in a little earlier in the week, consistent with the requirements of the
clerkship. I look forward to reading your subsequent work and observing what I am confident will be substantial continued
growth and improvement.
