
Having reviewed your sixth H&P, I have several comments, as usual. They are:
1. Your statement, up front, of the difficulties with the reliability of the informant, is very thoughtful and helps to
understand some of the problems with the HPI that resulted.
2. I commend you for including the duration of the chief complaint with the chief complaint itself.
3. Before I forget, I want to commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in the history. I hope you will
hold on to these points of style.
4. If there had not been a language barrier, the ideal place to begin would have been when he first learned of his
hypertension (as that is often an incidental finding and may have preceded everything else in his cardiac history. Also,
given the fact that he has mitral regurgitation, it would have been more complete to include, whether present or absent,
any history, however remote, of acute rheumatic fever. (If it did occur, it may have been when he was too young to
remember it; but sometimes parents tell a child of such a history and, if it were present, it would give some insights into
why he should have mitral regurgitation.) Chronologically, however, it appears that the HPI begins in the Dominican
Republic three months prior to admission, when he first was evaluated for exercise intolerance.
5. Some of the material in the Review of Systems (not Symptoms) rightfully belongs in the HPI and you need only have
said "see HPI". This includes the absence of weight change, as weight gain can be a cardiac symptom.
6. The items you included in the PMH are really part of the HPI and you had already mentioned them.
7. It is EXCELLENT that you included the manifestation of the allergy. This specific allergic manifestation might make
people take special precautions if he needed IV radiographic contrast.
8. I am delighted that you included the ages of individuals mentioned in the Family History. Since his father died a
cardiac death that fact would be appropriate to include in the HPI.
9. It would be more complete to give a more quantitative review of the smoking history.
10. It would be more complete to include the setting in which he works as a laborer, to allow consideration of potential
toxic exposures.
11. I am delighted that you noted the absence of pallor in the conjunctivae. Many people don't pay attention to that.
(Noting the absence of splinter hemorrhages in the eyes and/or hands would also have been appropriate.)
12. Your description of the murmur is excellent. The areas to which it radiates make me think he may have had two
abnormal valves. (It can be hard to distinguish two systolic murmurs.)
13. It is excellent that you stated how long ago he immigrated to the United States.
14. It would be more complete to state on which side he had the surgical scar on his ankle.
15. I am ecstatic that you percussed his chest!
16. It would have been a little more complete to include specific mention of the cranial nerves that you tested, as well as
deep tendon reflexes. If he had high-output heart failure from thyrotoxicosis, the DTRs might have given you a clue.
17. It would have been nice if the radiologist had commented on the cardiac size and whether there were any visible
valvular calcifications. Sometimes you will have to ask the radiologist specifically about this, as they often seem to just
read out "no evidence of acute disease".
18. Your assessment and plan are typically excellently thought out and written. It wouldn't surprise me if there is an
element of rheumatic heart disease, given his geographic origin and age.
19. As usual for you, your EBM portion is excellent, well searched and the article well chosen. And you made it very easy
for me to look up if I choose to, which is a part of good scholarship on your part.
TJ, I have completed my ERAS letter and it is ready to upload. I don't really care how you identify me, but some say
"Clinical Professor of Medicine" as that is what is under my signature. Be assured that it is a very strong letter, which you
eminently deserve. My chief regret is that my contact with you has been so short and is coming to an end. I wish you
every possible success (and also successes that may seem impossible).
Sincerely,
