
First, thank you for getting this to me so promptly. It helps me plan my own work schedule when you do this.
Second, I am glad you sent me the reference that you used for your EBM. This makes it more valid and allows me to look
at the reference myself if I wish to.
Third, it was so very nice to see you with your team on rounds this morning. I don't get out the the floors much, so this is
not something that I see very often.
And now, for my comments:
1. I get the sense that you wrote this H&P in some haste, as you didn't include the informant, the reliability, or the
duration of the chief complaint. I know that this is not characteristic of your work.
2. The visual field deficit that the patient described (and I commend you for getting him to describe it) sounds very much
like a scintillating scotoma, which is very characteristic of migraine. Migraine onset is very unusual at this patient's age,
but one thing you didn't really indicate clearly is whether this phenomenon was transient. Otherwise, your narrative of the
present illness is extremely well constructed.
3. In the Family History it would have been more complete to give his mother's age.
4. I commend you for including the children in the Family History.
5. It is excellent that you specified his type of work. It may have been more complete to state explicitly whether his work
as a contractor exposed him to any harmful environments.
6. In the physical examination, either in the HEENT or the neuro it would have been appropriate to record an estimate of
his visual fields. This is because of the content of his history. If he had had an occipital infarct from hypertensive
encephalopathy, a visual field deficit might be the first clue.
7. (Just to be annoying, I will tell you that it is "funduscopic" and not "fundoscopic" but very few people care about this
detail.)
8. But I WANT TO COMMEND YOU EXTREMELY HIGHLY FOR DOING A FUNDUSCOPIC EXAM. In well over 40
years I may have seen a student do this four or five times, and maybe not even that many!
9. Given the prominence of neurologic symptoms it would have been more complete to elicit deep tendon reflexes.
10. I am impressed by his hemoglobin of 17.3. It should be followed, as headache may be a sign of polycythemia vera.
Back in the very old days, there was an entity called "stress erythrocytosis" but I don't think this is considered a valid entity
any more.
11. Your Assessment and Plan summary statement is, as usual, very nicely written, well thought-out, and concise.
12. I am delighted that you thought of hyperaldosteronism and pheochromocytoma. Some 25% of pheochromocytomas
are found, unsuspected, at autopsy. The are never insignificant.
13. In your discussion of the elevated troponin, I am especially pleased with your use of the phrase "supply-demand
mismatch". Cardiac work is directly proportional to the product of the heart rate and the systolic blood pressure. Thus, an
elevated systolic blood pressure increases myocardial demand for oxygen, which sometimes can't be met if the coronaries
are compromised. That is why blood pressure control is so important in the management of the acute coronary syndrome.
14. Your EBM choice and discussion are excellent and very relevant to this patient.
your growth during these few weeks has been very impressive indeed. I am eager to see further H&Ps from you as
you complete them.
Have a great week-end.
