
It is enormously helpful to me that you submit your work so early in the week. That is especially true for this week.
I have reviewed your fifth H&P carefully and have comments that will point out its strengths and also areas that may
benefit from some changes. They are as follows:
1. It is excellent that you identify the informant and his reliability in providing the information.
2. You specifically mention that he is Russian-speaking. Was the history obtained directly from the patient? Or was it
obtained through an interpreter? If the latter, that should be mentioned with the informant.
3. Your chief complaint indicates its duration, which is excellent.
4. It would be a little more complete to indicate, in the early part of the HPI, when he first noted vertigo, its frequency,
how it is managed, and whether it is under good control.
5. "Dizzy" and "dizziness" are slightly ambiguous, as they could mean lightheadedness or actual vertigo, depending on
the person. It would be very important to maximize clarity to indicate what this patient means by dizzy. Because the low
blood pressure noted in the HPI may suggest that it was lightheadedness (a sense that one might lose consciousness) and
not necessarily his customary vertigo. This is especially important because you mention that there have been actual
losses of consciousness.
6. In this instance, the presence or absence of palpitations is a key element of the HPI. This is because he was found to
be in atrial fibrillation; but it is an integral part of any history involving lightheadedness or loss of consciousness.
7. In the last part of the HPI, you mention that he had a sandwich. It would be appropriate to indicate what was in the
sandwich. (It would enable the reader to speculate, to a certain extent, on the sodium content of what he ingested.)
8. Although you do give the alcohol level later in the write-up, it would have been appropriate to include it in the ED
Course part of the HPI.
9. I think you may be using the word "acuity" incorrectly in the ROS under "eyes". With regard to the eyes, "acuity"
means sharpness of vision, the ability to read correctly characters from various distances. "20/20" is a measure of visual
acuity.
10. In the gastrointestinal part of the ROS, you contradict your earlier statement, which indicated that he had had diarrhea
the night prior to admission. In the ROS you state that the GI history is negative for diarrhea.
11. In the PSH, it would be more complete to state when the contracture was released and, if known, whether it was a
Dupuytren's contracture (which can be associated with alcoholism).
12. Under Allergies, it is probable that his reaction to penicillin (GI upset) is really intolerance and not allergy. The term
allergy should be reserved for immune-mediated phenomena. It might be better to use the heading "Allergies and
Intolerances" and then indicate which applies to each included manifestation.
13. In the social history, it might be useful to indicate when he came to this country and from where. I am assuming that
he was not born in the US, as you introduce him as "Russian-speaking".
14. As the heart rate is listed as 71, I conclude that it came off a monitor (because 71 is a prime number and very few
people palpate the pulse for as long as a full minute). It is my feeling that a description of the rhythm should accompany
the heart rate in the vital signs. As we may have discussed earlier, with atrial fibrillation, it is very useful to record the heart
rate at the apex and at a peripheral artery. If the rhythm is irregularly irregular AND there is a difference between the rate
at the apex and the periphery of at least 10 beats per minute, this combination is pathognomonic of atrial fibrillation. That
is because with atrial fibrillation, some beats come so close together that the second one does not generate a palpable
pulse in the periphery because the left ventricle does not have enough blood in it to generate a palpable pulse. It is
therefore possible to diagnose with reasonable certainty atrial fibrillation on physical examination alone.
15. Given the history that you have recorded in the HPI, this is a patient who should have had orthostatic vital signs, at
least heart rate and blood pressure.
16. Please be aware that when you say "regular rate and rhythm" it is not really accurate. The rhythm may be regular (or
irregular, with or without a pattern such as trigeminy); but the rate is only one of three things: rapid, normal, or slow. And
that can be implicit if the actual rate is reported. I know that most people just say "regular rate and rhythm" but this is not a
correct statement and if you, heaven forbid, ever have to defend your records in court, this could lessen your credibility.
17. Please, please, please give the liver span instead of saying "no hepatosplenomegaly" and if the spleen is not
enlarged, just say that it is not palpable. "No hepatosplenomegaly" is not informative enough and does not give
information that allows comparison from exam to exam.
18. When listing the calcium with lab data, it is more informative if you also list the albumin. It is not possible to interpret
the calcium without a simultaneous albumin.
19. Your Assessment and Plan section is, as usual, absolutely outstanding, very thoughtful and to the point.
20. In "The King and I" the protagonist, Anna, has a line "by your pupils you'll be taught". This is what you have done for
me with your discussion of beer potomania. I had never heard this term before and it is a really important (if uncommon)

entity to know about. Frankly, now that I have read about it, I think there is a very, very good possibility that this is the
mechanism of this patient's hyponatremia and neurologic symptoms. Thank you for teaching me about this very important
clinical entity.
21. I agree that this patient is a candidate for an oral anticoagulant. But this can be complicated for a chronic consumer of
alcohol. .
22. Would he be a candidate for some sort of counseling to get him to abstain from alcohol? Or is this impractical in this
instance?
although I have made what seem to be a lot of constructive suggestions, this really is an excellent write-up. Much of
what I have suggested would just add polish to work that is already good, but some of the suggestions are meant to be
substantive and I hope that you will take them that way. It is exciting to watch you grow and to see, in addition to this
progress, your sensitivity to the human condition of your patients. Humanism is not something that your official teachers
can teach you. You were born a humanist and it is lucky for our profession that you are entering it.
I look forward to your sixth write-up. If you choose to send it to me earlier than your usual punctual practice, I will do my
best to get my comments back to you as promptly as possible.
