
First of all, it was so very nice to spend meaningful time with you one-on-one on Wednesday. I feel that I know you a little
better now and I feel enriched by this.
Second, I want to thank you for getting your fifth H&P to me in so timely a manner. It gave me time to review it and, now,
to get my comments back to you at a time that may be of value as you prepare your sixth write-up. My comments are as
follows:
1. It is great that you give the duration of the chief complaint up front with the CC itself.
2. It is great that you tell the reader the informant and his reliability right up front. It is important that you included the use
of an interpreter. That lets the reader apply a teeny bit of skepticism, if appropriate (although none appears to be needed
in this instance).
3. The HPI is very well done. It is appropriately complete yet succinct and well-focused. You have a good knack for
efficiency with volume of words. The only things that might be added as pertinent negatives, because they are potential
risk factors for ischemic heart disease, are high blood pressure, diabetes, and smoking. Although you do include absence
of smoking in the social history, it would be perfectly appropriate to include this in the HPI. But these omissions are not
major weaknesses, as the overall composition of the narrative of the HPI is excellent.
4. I commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in your write-up.
5. I want to reinforce your inclusion of the rhythm with the heart rate in the vitals. Keep doing this.
6 The same is true for your paying attention to the color of the conjunctivae. Especially since this patient is anemic, the
absence of conjunctival pallor is important to note.
7. It is very unusual for a liver to be truly not palpable. You may need more practice with this. And if it is truly not
palpable, then the scratch test is especially useful.
8. I think your assessment paragraph, which has the laudable Beier conciseness, would be a little stronger if you
included the anemia in it. If a patient has compromised coronaries, as this patient does, a low hemoglobin may be enough
to bring out angina or aggravate pre-existing angina, especially if the fall in hemoglobin is sudden.
9. Your discussion of the chest pain itself is very good.
10. I feel that the anemia is very important and needs more emphasis. In addition to iron studies, it would be advisable to
collect stools for occult blood. In addition, iron deficiency is not the only cause of microcytosis. Some hemoglobinopathies
are characterized by microcytosis. He is a native of a region in which certain intestinal parasites are more common than
they are in the United States and, especially if he is iron deficient, these should be sought as potential causes of iron
deficiency. If he is not iron deficient, then, to me, a peripheral smear exam (which is a sorely neglected diagnostic
maneuver) would be very important, as would a hemoglobin electrophoresis.
11. Although your EBM paragraph is based on a secondary source (UpToDate), it is a good first effort. However, I
personally would be more aggressive in pursuing this patient's coronary artery status. He should have, in addition to the
echo (a very good starting point), a nuclear cardiac scan to look for areas of hypoperfusion. In addition, I think that, given
his young age (to me 58 is young!), an angiogram would not be unreasonable. This is his first cardiac event, and he
already has evidence of myocardial damage. If he has a lesion that could be stented or otherwise remediated it would be
very important to pursue this as part of this admission. All too often, patients like this drop out of sight when they are
discharged. There could be conflicts with administrators over the increased length-of-stay caused by doing these
procedures while he is still in the hospital; but I am skeptical that he would keep outpatient appointments. It may be useful
to involve Social Work if there is an issue regarding health insurance coverage.
 the H&P part of this write-up shows excellent continued growth, of which you should be very proud. For your level of
training the discussions are good but could go a little deeper. It is possible that your team did not feel it was necessary to
be particularly aggressive with this patient but I feel it would be very important to find out the "why" underlying his problem,
not just the "what".
I look forward to your next H&P.
