
Now it is I who must apologize to you for being late. You have handed in yet another excellent write-up! Most of my
comments relate to style and not to substance.
1. I commend you for indicating that the informant is reliable.
2. I commend you for giving the duration of the chief complaint.
3. Your rendition of the HPI is extremely good. It would be more complete to start with his health status at the onset
of the hypertension then go on to the fact that he had had to stop treatment. The next fact would be how he was feeling
just prior to the onset of the chief complaint. And, because of his worsening edema, it would be more complete to include
any recent weight gain, if he is aware of it; but the HPI is really well constructed overall.
4. It would be reasonable to include tobacco history (present or absent) in the HPI, as well as any work exposures to
toxins because of the shortness of breath that he has been having.
5. If he was found to have a heart murmur with his military physical, it is relevant to state explicitly that he was permitted
or not permitted to enlist.
6. In the FH, I think you may have omitted his father, and the ages of some of the relatives mentioned.
7. It is very sensitive that you included the tragedies that he had recently experienced; but given the potential
impact of these on the heart, it might have been better to put these in the HPI.
8. Ideally, dyspnea on exertion should be quantified: how far can he walk before he gets short of breath. And this and
the cardiac items in the ROS should be in the HPI.
9. You indicate that he has nocturia. It is conventional to state how many times per night.
10. Unless you got the heart rate from a monitor, the rhythm should be described as "regular" rather than sinus -- unless
you used neck vein a and v waves to determine the rhythm.
11. Given his history, it would have been more complete to describe his respirations as either "labored" or "unlabored".
12. Because of his history, it would have been relevant to indicate the presence or absence of jugular vein distension and
a hepato-jugular reflux.
13. Were you able to determine his liver span?
14. In describing the skin on his legs as tight, was this edema? If so, did it pit? And how high up did it go (ankle, midshin, knee, thigh...)
15. Your discussion of assessment and plan is, again, truly excellent. I would comment that in a situation like this a
panic attack has to be a diagnosis of exclusion, because the other possibilities are too serious.
16. Your comments about his loss of insurance show you to be sensitive in exactly the right way. It is likely that
this whole admission wouldn't have happened if he hadn't lost his health coverage. Our society has to find an
alternative to employment-based health insurance. If there is time, I'd like to make a comment about this at
Monday's Clinical Challenge.
17. Your plan is well thought out. I would add a nuclear cardiac scan and/or stress test to look for areas of
hypoperfusion, and pulmonary function tests that include exercise-related oxygen saturations,.
18. Your EBM is very, very interesting and relevant. But because of the chest pain I would be very aggressive with his
blood pressure. Cardiac work (and therefore oxygen demand) is directly proportional to systolic blood pressure. If there is
an element of coronary artery disease his blood pressure would have to be brought down promptly.
you have continued to show substantial growth in a very short time. I am very impressed! I don't know
what your availability is later this afternoon, but I am not able to speak after about 5:30. At the very least, perhaps we
could speak after Monday's Clinical Challenge, or, if you wish, maybe some time on Sunday -- although I have some major
household chores to do on Sunday. And please be sure to send me an EPA.
Keep growing and developing into the great clinician you were born to be.
