
I have read this H&P and have several comments, including affirmation of the strengths and suggestions for improvement:
1. Your indication of the informants and their reliability right up front is to be complimented.
2. The same is true for your having included the duration of the chief complaint right up front.
3. Lest I forget, I want to commend you for avoiding the words "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in the document.
4. You indicate that you believe that the problem underlying the immediate episode is the chronic kidney disease (with
which I agree, at least in part). That being the case, it would have been appropriate to begin the history with the way the
underlying kidney disease presented, when it began, how it was managed, and the rhythm of its evolution (i.e., were there
sudden changes in kidney function, or was the decline gradual; and was there ever a renal biopsy?) If you did this it would
be very logical and add fluency and comprehensibility to the narrative.
5. It would be more informative to indicate the rhythm of the evolution of the lower extremity swelling: was it gradual or
sudden? (By the way, cardiac patients are usually advised to call the doctor if they gain two pounds per day two days in a
row. This is because by the time edema is clinically evident, there has been at least 10 pounds of fluid retention. If
patients would call the doctor after only 4 pounds, many hospitalizations could be prevented.)
6. It would be more informative to indicate whether the orange color of the urine is new or is it simply that he was making
less of his usual-colored urine.
7. It is very important to include what led to the diagnosis of the colon cancer: Was it a routine screening colonoscopy, or
were there symptoms that led to the colonoscopy? (The antecedent weight loss is very ominous in this setting.)
8. Please try to time events in relation to the moment of admission. I assume that the colonoscopy was two weeks prior
to admission. I assume that "today" means the day of admission. Remember that to someone who may be reading this
document weeks or years later this chronology must be explicit from the content of the document. Any lack of clarity in a
medical record, regardless how trivial it may seem, can have medicolegal implications.
9. You mention the heart disease, appropriately, more than once. It is very important. It would be more informative to go
into some detail about how the heart disease presented, the rhythm of its progression, and how it had been managed (if at
all) prior to the stents. (I personally think that the current episode is very likely related to evolution of both the renal
disease and the heart disease.)
10. The colon cancer is very, very important. Since you probably have access to the imaging studies, it would be very
important to mention the extent-of-disease for the colon cancer. (All cancers have two properties: A cell of origin and the
extent of disease [reflected in part in the staging]. In patients with cancer, even if cured, it is very important to specify the
extent of the disease at the time one sees the patient. "No evidence of active disease" is a very valid statement of extentof-disease for any cancer patient, if the tumor is believed to be cured. I spent over two years of my training at Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and this is how they described the status of the cancers in their patients. It made sense to
me then and it still does now.)
11. In the home medications you mention two antibiotics. It would be more informative to indicate whether these were
related to the cancer surgery (which seems unlikely so long after the surgery) or if there is some other reason that these
are being given. It is not evident from the information that you have compiled.
12. Please be aware that children are always part of the family history.
13. Your rendition of the smoking history is exactly as it should be: You tell the reader when he started and what his daily
consumption was, in addition to the total pack-years. For this I commend you.
14. The occupational history is as it should be: Not just the current status, but also what type of work he actually did.
Sometimes (although not in this instance) one can infer occupation-related illness if you do it correctly as you did.
15. In the ROS, it was not necessary to repeat the weight changes. Just say "see HPI".
16. It would be more informative to give more detail about the neck pain in the ROS. I believe I sent you some slides
about the oral patient presentation and several of them discuss how to present pain.
17. My compliments for including the rhythm with the heart rate.
18. To me, at least, if you say that the chest is clear to auscultation that means that there are no adventitious sounds and
it isn't really necessary to state that they are absent. But it is widely done and so I guess my philosophy of not wasting ink
in the write-up is not practiced. But this is a chest that should have been percussed (as they all should).
19. I commend you for measuring the liver span. As a matter of curiosity, what technique did you use to determine it?
20. It is EXCELLENT that you gave a semi-quantitative measure of the extent of the edema, using the (excellent)
immobile landmark of the tibial tuberosity. (By the way, some would say "distal to" rather than "below". But that is not a big
deal. It's just that "below" could be considered ambiguous and with "distal" there is no doubt about what you mean.)
21. With any swollen extremity it is helpful to include whether the swollen areas show signs of inflammation other than
swelling (e.g., warmth, redness, or tenderness). And with leg swelling it is always relevant to indicate the presence or
absence of calf tenderness.
22. I am a little surprised that you didn't mention the elevated glucose anywhere in the Assessment/Plan.
10/3/21, 4:31 PM Re: H&P?
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
23. Be aware that a serum calcium is not interpretable without a concomitant serum albumin level.
24. With all anemic patients, it is a good practice to include the MCV and RDW in the data. They are usually there and
can have differential diagnostic implications. You mention in the Assessment/Plan that it is normal but you did not give the
value in the lab data.
25. In reading the chest x-ray it would have been more complete to mention specifically the cardiac size, especially in this
patient. "No acute abnormalities", while a common reading, is really only part of the story. This is especially true for a
patient with an extremely elevated proBNP.
26. Your Assessment/Plan segment is characteristically very thoughtful and reasonably complete. In discussing the CHF
it would be more complete to include an echocardiogram in the evaluation of this patient.
27. This patient's anemia is far out of proportion to the extent of his renal disease. To me it warrants a work-up. From the
absence of mention of any abdominal scars I assume he did not have major colorectal surgery yet. Anemia of this extent
related to blood loss from a colon cancer should have been microcytic. (It distresses me that many of our colleagues do
not pursue the diagnosis of anemia to find an etiology, often attributing it to "chronic disease". I will never get used to
that.) When you surmise that the anemia "could be related to underlying malignancy: it means one of two things: blood
loss or marrow replacement or suppression. If it is really normocytic it is unlikely to be due to blood loss. Since the WBC
and platelets are normal it is unlikely to be bone marrow replacement. Because the M in MCV is "mean" it is valuable to
look at the RDW, which might indicate two populations of red blood cells, large and small, giving a normal "mean". A look
at the peripheral smear would clear this up immediately (but this is a dying art that should be resuscitated).
28. In addition to the anemia itself, please be aware that a sodium level of 120 can be associated with neurologic
symptoms quite similar to what this patient has. In this instance the hyponatremia could be dilutional; but with intrinsic
renal disease all bets are off and the nephrologist should be consulted promptly.
29. Your EBM is very appropriate and I am glad that you chose this subject. Earlier this year there was a grand rounds in
the Department of Medicine that raised doubts about the extent to which contrast actually leads to renal injury. It may be
an icon that is about to be toppled. But the paper is still relevant and you were very astute to choose it.
this is an extremely complex patient for anyone, all the more so for a beginning M3 student. Overall I think you
handled the H&P nicely, although there is room for improvement, of course. But if that were not the case, you wouldn't be
a student. (By the way, even 52 years after I graduated -- and 54 years after my M3 year -- I still have lots of room for
improvement. That is what they are referring to when they describe medicine as a profession with "lifelong learning".
Don't be discouraged by the volume of my comments. This was an extremely complex patient and I think your write-up is
quite good.
However, to be true to myself I must comment on the fact that you turned it in quite late, which complicates my own work.
Next week will be extremely busy for me and I am asking you now to please comply with the deadline of Wednesday
evening as set forth in the clerkship guidelines. Thursday I will be very occupied with M2 physical diagnosis and that will
make it very hard for me to read your fourth H&P in a timely manner if you don't get it to me by day's end Wednesday.
