
Informant: Patient, reliable historian
CC: “I’ve had worsening stomach pain and bloating for the past week”
HPI: This is a 41 year old female with a PMHx of alcoholic liver cirrhosis, ascites, chronic pancreatitis, and 
IDDM secondary to pancreatic insufficiency, who has been in declining health for the past several years 
and presents with a 1 week history of gradually worsening abdominal distention and pain starting in the 
mid lower abdomen radiating to the chest and back rated at "14/10" and described as burning pain. She 
states she cannot take a full breath because of the pain. She was seen in the hospital 2 weeks ago for 
ascites and hepatic encephalopathy, had 3L removed via paracentesis, was treated with Furosemide, 
Spironolactone, Lactulose, and Rifaximin and her condition improved. She was discharged and planned to 
follow-up with Dr. Kahalleh on 9/29, but presented to the ED prior to her scheduled appointment due to 
worsening pain. She reports nausea and headache from stress, does not report confusion. She also reports 
foot swelling for 4 days.
ED Course: Paracentesis performed in ED. 6.8L of yellow fluid drained from abdomen.
PMD: Dr. Grubb
GI: Dr. Kahalleh
PMH: Alcoholic cirrhosis with recurrent ascites, Pancreatitis in 2017 with pancreatic stents, GERD, opioid 
use disorder, alcohol use disorder, Depression, Neuropathy
Surgical History: Pancreatic stents over 1 year ago
Social History: + 30 pack yr history of smoking, history of EtOH abuse, quit in February of this year, no
current illicit drug use, prior history of opioid use.
Patient lives at home with her husband, neither are currently working - husband was just laid off of work.
The patient formally worked as a waitress but stopped working about 2-3 years ago due to declining 
health. 
Family history: No history of illness in parents or siblings, both parents are alive and in their late 60s. No 
children.
Medications:
Duloxetine 30 mg oral delayed release capsule 1 cap(s) orally once a day
furosemide 40 mg oral tablet 1 tab(s) orally once a day
lactulose 10 g/15 mL oral syrup 15 milliliter(s) oral 3 times a day
magnesium oxide 400 mg (241.3 mg elemental magnesium) oral tablet 2 tab(s) orally once a day 
Multiple Vitamins oral tablet 1 tab(s) orally once a day
niacin 500 mg oral capsule, extended release 1 cap(s) orally once a day (at bedtime)
pancrelipase 36,000 units-114,000 units-180,000 units oral delayed release capsule 2 cap(s) orally 3 times 
a day (with meals)
potassium chloride 15 mEq oral tablet, extended release 2 tab(s) orally once a day
Rifaximin 550 mg oral tablet 1 tab(s) orally 2 times a day
Insulin Lispro Kwikipen
ALLERGIES: NKDA
TJ Hanlon H&P 2 sent Wed 9/22 10:02 pm
ROS:
General: + Nausea, no vomiting, fever, chills, or weakness
Cardiac: + chest pain radiation from abdomen
Pulm: No shortness of breath, but patient reports difficulty taking a full breath due to abdominal 
distention
Abdomen: See HPI
GI: 9 bowel movements yesterday started as well-formed, but progressed to diarrhea 
Physical Exam: 
VITALS 
T: 98.1 Tmax: 98.1 @ 15 Sep 10:19
HR: 115 regular
BP: 118/82 
RR: 16 SpO2: 98% on RA
Weight: 141lbs
General: Patient appears in moderate discomfort secondary to pain. Patient is a good historian, alert and 
oriented to person place and time. 
Skin: Facial jaundice noted, no rashes, petechiae or ecchymosis
HEENT: Mucus membranes moist, minimal scleral icterus, no conjunctival pallor. No JVD.
Cardiac: Tachycardia, regular rhythm, no rubs murmurs or gallops, normal S1 and S2.
Pulmonary: Clear and equal bilaterally, no rales, rhonchi, or wheezes
Abdomen: Massively distended protuberant abdomen with rigidity and diffuse exquisite tenderness; 
patient winces to light touch of the abdomen. Unable to assess liver span secondary to patient discomfort
Back: No CVA tenderness or spinal tenderness
Extremities: 1-2+ Pitting edema of bilateral lower extremities to the level of the ankle, no deformities 
noted. Radial and DP pulses 2+
Neurologic: Bilateral hand tremor at rest consistent with asterixis
LABS 
126 | 93 | 8
--------------------< 117 Ca: 7.8 [09/15 @ 11:05]
5.6 | 24.0 | 0.2
WBC: 15.9 / Hb: 10.9 / Hct: 31.6 / Plt: 130 [09/15 @ 11:05]
-- Diff: N:77.60% L:16.6% Mo:4.4% Eo:0.4% Baso:0.3%
PT: 18.8 / PTT: x / INR: 1.67 [09/15 @ 11:05]
AST: 58 / ALT: 18 / AlkPhos: 196 / Bili: 4.3 / Dir: 2.4 / Prot: 7.3 / Alb: 1.8 / Lip: 13 [09/15 @ 11:05] 
Assessment: This is a 41 year old female with a history of alcoholic cirrhosis, recurrent ascites, chronic 
pancreatitis who presents with a 1 week history of gradually worsening abdominal pain and distention. On 
physical exam the patient is jaundiced with a massively distended abdomen with diffuse tenderness. 
Paracentesis was performed in ED, 6.8L of yellow fluid drained. Abdominal pain with ascites concerning for 
liver failure, pancreatitis, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, or malignancy. 
TJ Hanlon H&P 2 sent Wed 9/22 10:02 pm
#Abdominal pain of unknown origin and distention
- Concern for multiple etiologies including acute liver failure or pancreatitis given patient's history of 
chronic pancreatitis and cirrhosis. Patient is afebrile, but elevated WBC raises concern for spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis. Will send ascites fluid to pathology for analysis of serum-to-ascites albumin gradient, 
cell count and differential, culture, and total protein. Will treat SBP prophylactically with Ceftriaxone 1g IV 
q24hrs until pathology results return. Will continue to monitor patient's pain and treat with Morphine 
2mg IV q4hrs PRN. Will consider CT A/P based on pathology results of ascites analysis and if pain 
continues after paracentesis. Will treat with Albumin 8g per L of fluid removed, 60g total. Will contact Dr. 
Kahalleh for GI consult and plan for follow-up and management.
#Cirrhosis/Hepatic encephalopathy
- Patient with history of cirrhosis and elevated liver enzymes (AST 58). Will continue patient's home 
medication of Lactulose and Rifaximin to prevent worsening hepatic encephalopathy and await ascites 
pathology report for further management. Will monitor for worsening asterixis or confusion indicative of 
worsening encephalopathy. Patient with hyperbilirubinemia likely secondary to failing liver function, is 
similar to bilirubin on prior admission. CHILD-PUGH Class C, MELD Score 21 which would indicate she is in 
need of a liver transplant. Will consult GI for plan for potentially evaluating patient for liver transplant. 
#Electrolyte imbalance
- Will continue to monitor hyponatremia and re-evaluate in 12 hours as patient has no significant 
symptoms of hyponatremia and is potentially chronic based on prior hospitalizations' values (past 
hospitalization sodium levels of 127 prior to paracentesis). Could also be secondary to significant ascites 
and will re-check after paracentesis.
#Tacchycardia
- Could be secondary to pain or infection, will continue to continuously monitor heart rate, but no 
intervention at this time. 
#Diarrhea
- Patient reports chronic diarrhea when taking lactulose, will continue to monitor for worsening 
diarrhea vs worsening/improving encephalopathy and can increase or decrease lactulose dosing 
accordingly. 
#Pancreatic insufficiency
- Will continue patient's home medications (Pancrelipase) and monitor blood glucose levels. 
#Health Insurance Coverage
- Patient expresses concern that her husband was recently laid off and their health insurance will expire 
at the end of this month. Will discuss with social work and have them evaluate potential options 
including Medicaid eligibility. 

