
Date: 4/27/2021
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Chief complaint: Lower Extremity Swelling
History of Present Illness:
Patient is a 43 y/o male smoker with a previous medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, which was 
diagnosed by his primary care provider 1 day ago. HR reports that on Easter he injured his left knee 
while moving boxes. He said the knee was swollen and painful for around two weeks, during which time 
he was predominantly immobile, iced and elevated his left knee, and took NSAIDs for pain control. Upon 
resolution of the pain, HR began to return to his normal activities as a high school football coach. He 
reports that for a few weeks, he noted polyuria and polydipsia, which prompted him to schedule an 
appointment with his PCP. Additionally, for the past 3 days, he has noticed swelling of his left lower 
extremity. At the office, the PCP noted that HR was tachycardic, hypertensive, and had significant 
swelling of the left lower extremity. A finger stick blood glucose reading was taken and found to be 505. 
The patient was then instructed to come directly to the ED. In the ED the patient was saturating well on 
room air. A CBC was ordered, with WBC of 10.5. BMP was unremarkable, and Troponin was within 
normal limits. The patient’s D-dimer levels were elevated to 2237. On talking with the patient, he denies 
any recent travel, shortness of breath, chest pain, dyspnea on exertion, fever, chills, or syncope. 
However he confirms prolonged immobilization of two to three weeks due to his knee injury.
Past Medical History:
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Diagnosed April 26th 2021
Obesity: BMI 34
Left Knee Injury April 4th 2021
Otherwise unremarkable
Past Surgical History:
None
Medications:
Metformin 500mg PO once daily
Family History:
Father with CAD
No family history of coagulation disorders
Social History
Smokes ½ pack of cigarettes a day for 20 years
Does not drink alcohol
Does not use illicit drugs
Works as a high school football coach
Housing situation is secure
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: Patient denies fevers, chills, night sweats, weight loss or gain
HEENT: denies headache, ear pain, tinnitus, blurry vision
Cardiovascular: denies chest pain, palpitations, DOE, LE edema
Respiratory: denies SOB, coughing, wheezing
Gastrointestinal: Denies abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, melena
Genitourinary: Confirms polyuria, frequency, nocturia. Denies dysuria, hematuria, urinary retention. 
MSK: See HPI
Skin: denies rashes
Psych: Denies depression, anxiety, SI/HI
Physical Exam:. 
Vitals: Temp 97.8 (oral), HR 107, BP 135/92, RR 18, SPO2 97% on room air
General: Well appearing male of stated age in no acute distress
Skin: Normal appearing with no discoloration
HEENT: Normocephalic and atraumatic. Pupils equally round and reactive to light.
Neck: No cervical lymphadenopathy. No palpable masses. Trachea midline.
Pulm: Lungs are clear to auscultation. No crackles/rales/wheezes/rhonci.
Cardiac: Tachycardic, normal S1 and S2. No rubs, murmurs, or gallops.
GI: Abdomen is nontender, nondistended, no palpable masses, and bowel sounds are present in all four 
quadrants. 
Extremities: Patient has 1+ pitting edema in R leg, 2+ pitting edema L leg.
Neuro: Alert and oriented x3. Denies numbness, weakness, paresthesias.
Psych: Normal affect. Nice and cooperative. Seems anxious.
Labs & Imaging:
AST: 14 / ALT: 18 / AlkPhos: 63 / Bili: 0.5 / Prot: 6.5 / Alb: 3.6
Na: 136, K: 3.6, Cl: 100, HCO3: 22.7, BUN 18, Cr: 0.9, Ca: 9.0, Mg: 1.8 
HbA1c: 11
PT: 13.3 / PTT: x / INR: 1.19
WBC: 10.5 / Hb: 16.2 / Hct: 46.5 / Plt: 271
-Diff: N: 62.7% L: 29.3% Mo: 5.9% Eo: 1.7% Baso: 0.4%
Cholesterol: 
Total: 215, HDL: 32, LDL, 121, Triglycerides: 336
Troponin T: <0.01
D-dimer: 2237
LE US with Doppler: There is evidence of thrombus within the left femoral through popliteal vein.
EKG: Sinus tachycardia without ischemic changes
CTA chest: Acute pulmonary emboli in the right lower lobe segmental and subsegmental pulmonary 
arteries as well as the left lower lobe segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries. No evidence of 
right heart strain.
Assessment
Patient is 43-year-old male smoker with PMH of T2DM presenting with 3 days of LLE swelling. Physical 
exam notable for 2+ LLE edema. Duplex Ultrasound shows left femoral DVT. CTA chest shows bilateral 
pulmonary emboli.
1. Bilateral Pulmonary Embolisms
This patient is suffering from bilateral PEs most likely resulting from his left femoral DVT. Though this is 
the most likely cause, other causes of PE should still be considered. Given the patients smoking history, 
cancer should also be considered as a possible cause of hypercoagulability.
2. Lower extremity edema
Patient presented with 1+ pitting edema in the right leg and 2+ pitting edema in the left leg. The 
asymmetry is likely due to reduced venous blood flow in the left leg due to the left femoral DVT. 
However, the DVT does not explain the bilateral swelling at baseline. This patient’s presentation of 
polyuria, polydipsia and new onset T2DM could hint at possible kidney damage. Diabetic nephropathy 
could explain the patient’s lower extremity swelling. Urinalysis should be performed to check for 
proteinuria. Additionally, given this patients cardiac risk factors (hyperlipidemia, obesity, smoking 
history), an atypical MI or heart failure could also be the cause of the patient’s lower extremity edema. 
Plan:
1. PE and DVT
The management of this patients PE and DVT will be the same. Patient should be started on 
anticoagulation (factor Xa inhibitor or Warfarin) to reduced further coagulation. Patient should remain 
on anticoagulation for 3-6 months following discharge.
2. Hyperlipidemia
Patient was found to have elevated cholesterol on labs. The patients calculated ASCVD score indicates a 
17.2% probability of adverse coronary event. The most current recommendation is that patients with an 
ASCVD of >7.5% be started on a high intensity statin. This patient should be started on 40mg 
atorvastatin and follow up with is PCP
3. Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Patient was started on 500mg metformin 1 day ago. However, current literature suggests that 
metformin can lower HbA1c by 2 points, which would leave this patient at 9. A second generation 
Sulfonylurea such as glipizide should be considered and patient should follow up with his PCP. 
