
Having read your write-up of your second history and physical examination, I have, as usual, several comments for your
review. You sent this one to my RRWJMS email address, which does work; but I ask that you please send the remaining
ones to my AOL email, fishbru@aol.com, as this is a little easier for me to work with.
My comments are as follows:
1. I am pleased that you indicated the informant and the reliability of the informant right up front.
2. It is very good that you included the duration of the chief complaint together with the chief complaint.
3. Please use fewer abbreviations in your written documents. For example, "c/b" probably means "complicated by" but it
is not a standard abbreviation. In a formal document like an H&P that is a part of a hospital record, there is a strictly
limited list of abbreviations. Each hospital has one and if parts of the medical record deviate from this list, the hospital can
be penalized by its accrediting body, the Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO).
This can be very bad for the hospital.
4. It is a very good practice, as you did, to state that the patient was in his "usual state of health" at the onset of the chief
complaint. But it would be more informative to state, briefly, what this "usual" state of health is.
5. It would have been more complete and more informative to describe, briefly, how he had been managing his diabetes
and the extent to which it had been controlled. In the initial paragraph you imply that it was not in good control, by stating
he had had multiple admissions for ketoacidosis; but, really, this history is the history of his diabetes (complicated by
alcohol use), and so a little more detail about the way his diabetes had been managed would have been appropriate in the
HPI itself. If this information was not available because the informant was the EMS and the patient was not alert enough to
give more information, that should be stated explicitly.
6. In the social history, it would be more complete to mention his marital status and his occupational history, especially if
he has had trouble keeping a job because of the alcohol use. (Alcohol use also can lead to loss or suspension of a driver's
license, and if that is the case, that should be mentioned in the social history also.
7. You did use the word "denies" in the SH. Tsk, tsk.
8. But you otherwise avoided 'admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" and for this I commend you.
9. In the Vitals, it is conventional to indicate the regularity of the rhythm up front with the heart rate.
10. This is a patient who should have had postural vital signs in the emergency department.
11. It is commendable that you describe his as uncomfortable; but it would be more complete to indicate what it was that
made him uncomfortable. For example, was he having abdominal pain, chest pain, nausea...
12. It is very good that you described his dentition as poor; but it would be more complete and informative if you had gone
into a little more detail about what his mouth and teeth looked like: Were there missing teeth, were there obvious caries,
was there any swelling or discharge from the gingivae...?
13 Please measure the liver span in every patient. If you need to review how to do this, remind me when I see you on
Wednesday and I will go over it with you. Meanwhile, I am attaching a set of slides that discuss this part of the exam.
14. It is very good that you include the calcium with the labs; but be aware that the calcium is not interpretable without
simultaneous measuring of the albumin.
15. This is a patient whose initial labs should have included a urinalysis, including reporting the microscopic exam of the
sediment. In your Assessment and Plan you mention ketonuria, but I did not see mention of the urine anywhere else. It
would have been reasonable also to include blood ketones.
16. In your discussion of the left knee pain, you speak of the "temporal nature" when I think you may have meant
"temporal relationship". As we discussed, I feel that an arthrocentesis would not have been unreasonable in the initial
assessment of this patient. Even if your team chose not to do it, in the write-up that you hand in you could have spoken of
this.
17. In your overall plan, the omission of any mention of a social work consultation is a very significant omission. Please
remember that social factors are responsible for a great deal of medical morbidity in our society.
although there is a good deal of information in this write-up, I feel that it is more superficial than I would like to see in
an inpatient admission note. Please try to include more detail in subsequent H&Ps that you hand in. In the long run your
professional growth will be greater if you do this. What the patient was like at the time of admission is extremely important
as a point of reference for the rest of the hospital stay, and it is in the patient's best interest for this to be documented
thoroughly.
I do look forward to subsequent H&Ps from you, and to seeing you with your clerkship group at the Clinical Challenge
session this Wednesday.
