
Reliability: The patient is not a reliable source of information. History was provided by her 
primary caregiver, her daughter. 
Chief Complaint: “My mom has been having chest pain with cough for a few days.”
HPI: The patient is a 94YO Spanish-speaking female with a PMH of hypertension (HTN), 
hyperlipidemia (HLD), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), cataracts, gastroesophageal reflux 
disease (GERD), rheumatoid arthritis, and aortic valve replacement secondary to 
calcification presenting to the RWJUH ED with three days of progressive chest pain. Family 
history is significant for coronary artery disease in her two sisters and one brother. The 
patient previously felt well. The patient did not alert her family of the chest pain until last 
night, when she started having an accompanied cough causing the chest pain to worsen. 
The cough is productive, and sputum is clear. The patient states that now the chest pain is 
only apparent when she coughs. She describes the chest pain as a heaviness or pressurelike discomfort that radiates to her jaw and left arm. She explains that the chest pain was 
initially exacerbated upon exertion, but as of last night, the chest pain was not correlated to 
either exertion or rest. The patient has shortness of breath, which is not usual for her. She 
has found that sitting up and leaning forward helps to decrease her discomfort, whereas 
lying down worsens it. The pain is not accompanied by swallowing or with food ingestion 
and is not reproducible upon palpation. The patient again states that she has a cough and 
also explains that she has had some cold sweats. Her granddaughter works as at a daycare 
and is frequently coming home with colds. Recently, this week, her granddaughter has been 
sneezing. She does not have any nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or palpitations. She 
states that she has never had this pain before and is worried that it could be her heart.
ED Course: Given 324 mg of ASA in ambulance. CXR shows no signs of acute 
cardiopulmonary disease. EKG showed evidence of T wave change compared to previous 
EKG done in November 2021.
ROS: 
General: Negative for weight loss, change in appetite, change in energy
Skin: Negative for rashes, infections, hair and nail problems, other lesions
Eyes: Negative for acuity, strabismus, infection, irritation
Ears: Negative for hearing, pain, discharge, infections
Nose, mouth, throat: Negative for epistaxis, discharge, nasal polyps, snoring, obstruction or 
apnea during sleep, pain, tooth or gum problems, other lesions, dysphagia, odynophagia
Cardio-respiratory: Positive for pressure-like chest pain and mild shortness of breath, 
productive cough; negative for frequent colds/pneumonias, wheezing, stridor, exercise 
tolerance, excessive fatigue, palpitations, hypertension, cyanosis
Gastrointestinal: Negative for abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, 
rectal bleeding, other stool abnormalities, jaundice
Genitourinary: Negative for dysuria, frequency, urgency, polyuria, enuresis, infections, 
irritation, discharge
Submitted MONDAY 2022 04 18 2:49 pm
Hematopoietic: Negative for lymphadenopathy, anemia, pallor, bleeding, bruising
Neuromuscular: Positive for arthritis in shoulders, knees, back, hands bilaterally; negative 
for arthralgias, myalgias, weakness, paralysis, tremors, tics, chorea, athetosis, ataxia, 
headache, loss of consciousness, seizures
Psychiatric: Negative for extremes of mood, depression, abnormal thought process, other
PMH:
HTN
HLD
DM
Rheumatoid arthritis
GERD
Cataracts
PSH:
Aortic valve replacement 7-8 years ago - 2/2 to calcification
Medications:
Besaglar 14 units at bedtime
Novolog 12 units TID with meals
Tramadol 50mg 2 tablets TID for pain
Omeprazole 20mg daily
Lisinopril 5mg daily
Amlodipine 5mg daily
Atorvastatin 10mg daily
Allergies:
NKDA
No allergies to latex or food
Family History:
Two sisters and brother have coronary artery disease
Two sisters deceased from breast cancer
Daughter: breast cancer s/p lumpectomy
Social History:
Tobacco: Never
Alcohol: None
Drugs: Never
Job: Retired secretary at school in Cuba
Lives with eldest daughter and her husband, who are her caregivers
One of thirteen children – one of four still living
Born in Cuba – Spanish is primary preferred language
Submitted MONDAY 2022 04 18 2:49 pm
Physical Exam: 
Vital Signs: 
 BP = 149/66 mmHg
 HR = 100 bpm
 RR = 18 breaths/minute
 T = 99.3 degrees F
 SaO2 = 94% on room air
General appearance: Appears to be in mild distress, dressed in hospital gown
Skin: Warm to touch, dry, intact; no erythema, rashes, lesions, scars, ulcers
Head: Normocephalic, no evidence of trauma, tenderness, or lesions
Eyes: No scleral icterus; pupils equal round and reactive to light and accommodation
Ears: No erythema, lesions, or tenderness in external ears; hearing intact
Nose: Not assessed
Mouth and throat: No erythema, ulcers, lesions of oropharynx
Neck: No JVD, carotid bruits, adenopathy, thyromegaly; trachea midline
Lymph nodes: No lymphadenopathy 
Chest/Lungs: Resonant to percussion bilaterally; high-pitched inspiratory bronchial breath 
sounds bilaterally throughout lung field; symmetric chest expansion; no accessory muscle 
use; no tenderness on palpation; no wheezing, crackles, rhonchi
Heart: Regular S1 and S2, grade 2/6 systolic ejection murmur at right upper sternal border; 
PMI is nondisplaced, regular rate and rhythm; no S3, no S4, no rubs
Abdomen: Soft abdomen that is nondistended and not tender to palpation; normoactive 
bowel sounds; no hepatosplenomegaly
Extremities: No cyanosis, clubbing, pitting edema; peripheral pulses present bilaterally
Neurologic/developmental: The patient was oriented to time, place, and person; CN 2-12
intact; sensation, motor, reflexes not assessed
Labs:
BMP: 
 Na = 144, K = 4.3, Cl = 106, BUN = 23, Cr = 0.7, HCO3 = 24.8
 Ca = 9.6
 Mg = 1.2
CBC:
 WBC = 8.0, Hb = 11.2, PLT = 167
Troponins = 17 (normal for age = 14) 
CRP = <0.30
ProBNP = 231 (within normal limits for age) 
Imaging:
CXR: No evidence of acute cardiopulmonary disease
EKG: Sinus rhythm with premature supraventricular complexes; possible left bundle 
branch block; T wave abnormality to consider inferolateral ischemia 
 PR = 136
 QRS = 130, QTc = 425
 Normal axis
Submitted MONDAY 2022 04 18 2:49 pm
Assessment and Plan:
The patient is a 94YO Spanish-speaking female with a PMH of hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, type 2 diabetes mellitus, cataracts, gastroesophageal reflux disease, 
rheumatoid arthritis, and aortic valve replacement secondary to calcification presenting to 
the RWJUH ED with three days of progressive chest pain with cough. She is in mild distress. 
EKG showed evidence of T wave abnormalities with a possible LBBB. CXR showed no 
evidence of acute cardiopulmonary changes. The most likely diagnosis is an NSTEMI with 
evidence of elevated troponin and EKG changes. 
Problem #1: Chest Pain with Cough
DDx: NSTEMI, PE (Wells score = 0), Pneumonia, Pericarditis
 The most likely diagnosis is an NSTEMI as the patient has mildly elevated troponins 
with chest pain and EKG changes that can indicate ischemia. 
 Pericarditis is also a likely diagnosis as the patient’s chest pain is worse while laying 
down and improved with leaning forward. It is also associated with cough, which 
may be seen with pericarditis. 
 Pneumonia is on the differential as the patient has chest pain associated with a 
productive cough such that the chest pain is exacerbated while coughing. This is 
lower on the differential as the chest xray came back without evidence of pulmonary 
infiltrates. 
 Pulmonary embolism is lowest on the differential as the patient’s Wells score was 
equal to zero. 
Troponin = 17 (normal for age = 14)
Pro-BNP = 231
CRP = <0.30
Consult cardiology – medical management vs. cardiac catheterization 
Obtain serial EKGs and troponins
Maintain patient on telemetry
Order TTE to assess pericardial tissue
Can consider stress test as patient’s troponin is mildly elevated and EKG changes may be 
nonspecific 
Repeat CXR in a few days if cough persists, patient appears to look more toxic, becomes 
febrile, or has an increase in white count
Problem #2: HTN - stable
Continue lisinopril 5 mg qd and amlodipine 5 mg qd
Follow up outpatient 
Problem #3: HLD - stable
Continue atorvastatin 10 mg qd
Follow up outpatient 
Problem #4: DM - stable
Continue basal-bolus home med regimen of Besaglar and Novolog 
Will reassess based on blood glucose while in hospital 
Follow up outpatient 
Submitted MONDAY 2022 04 18 2:49 pm
Problem #5: RA - stable
Continue tramadol 50 mg 2 tablets TID for pain
Provide lidocaine patch if patient requires more pain control
Follow up outpatient
Problem #6: GERD - stable
Continue omeprazole 20 mg qd
Follow up outpatient 
PICO: 
Question: Is invasive cardiac catheterization associated with better treatment outcomes 
compared to medical management alone in patients with stable coronary artery disease?
P: Patients with moderate or severe ischemia
I: Angiography with revascularization and medical therapy (invasive therapy)
C: Medical therapy alone
O: Invasive therapy does not reduce risk of ischemic cardiovascular events or death from 
any cause compared to medical therapy alone. 
Reference: Maron, D. J., Al., E., Group*, for the I. S. C. H. E. M. I. A. R., Author AffiliationsFrom 
the Department of Medicine, Braunwald, E. M. A. and E., Others, J. A. S. and, Others, S. B. M. 
and, Others, J. H. and, Others, H. A.-S. and, Y. M. Bar-On and Others, Others, O. M. and, & Offit, 
P. A. (2020, April 9). Initial invasive or conservative strategy for stable coronary disease: 
Nejm. New England Journal of Medicine. Retrieved April 18, 2022, from 
https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1915922