
Chief Complaint: “Today, I woke up dizzier than usual, and had to lay myself on the 
ground.”
HPI: The patient is a 68YO Russian-speaking male with a PMH significant for vertigo, 
hypertension, and hyponatremia who presents to RWJUH ED with dizziness that started 
this morning. The patient explains that he always feels dizzy which he attributes to his 
vertigo, but that this morning, he felt dizzier than usual. After symptom onset, he laid 
himself on the ground where his apartment administrator saw him and called EMS. Upon 
arrival, his blood pressure was ~90/60 mmHg with evidence of orthostasis. He did not lose 
consciousness. The patient has a recent history of syncope in which he abruptly lost 
consciousness without urinary/fecal incontinence. He states that he thinks this occurred in 
the setting of low blood pressure, but did not have any associated chest pain, shortness of 
breath. This has occurred one or two times in the past three months. Of note, the patient 
explains that he had a recent episode of hyponatremia in which he felt dizzy and 
lightheaded, resulting in him having to lay down. He was evaluated at his primary care 
doctor’s office who gave him a short course of NaCl tablets. He is currently not taking the 
tablets anymore. This morning, his dizziness was accompanied by lightheadedness and 
headache. He states that he did not have any chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea, 
vomiting, or abdominal pain. He states that he did have some diarrhea the night before, but 
that this is not unusual for him. He is urinating regularly, which is normal for him. He also 
states that he had his fifth beer of the day at around 3:00-3:30 AM after he was not able to 
fall asleep. He explains that he usually drinks about 4-5 beers a day and has done so for the 
past 51 years. He has never been through alcohol withdrawal. He has consumed about 2
bottles of water since yesterday. He last ate lunch yesterday, during which he had a 
sandwich.
ED Course: Was given NS bolus of 500cc. EKG showed atrial fibrillation. Noncontrast CT 
head and CXR showed no acute disease. Troponins were WNL. Alcohol level was elevated.
ROS: 
General: Negative for weight loss, change in appetite, change in energy
Skin: Negative for rashes, infections, hair and nail problems, other lesions
Eyes: Negative for acuity, strabismus, infection, irritation
Ears: Negative for hearing, pain, discharge, infections
Nose, mouth, throat: Negative for epistaxis, discharge, nasal polyps, snoring, obstruction or 
apnea during sleep, pain, tooth or gum problems, other lesions, dysphagia, odynophagia 
Cardio-respiratory: Negative for chest pain and shortness of breath, productive cough, 
frequent colds/pneumonias, wheezing, stridor, exercise tolerance, excessive fatigue, 
palpitations, hypertension, cyanosis
Submitted Monday 2022 04 25 ~3:30 pm
Gastrointestinal: Negative for abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, constipation, 
rectal bleeding, other stool abnormalities, jaundice
Genitourinary: Negative for dysuria, frequency, urgency, polyuria, enuresis, infections, 
irritation, discharge
Hematopoietic: Negative for lymphadenopathy, anemia, pallor, bleeding, bruising
Neuromuscular: Positive for headache; negative for arthritis, arthralgias, myalgias, 
weakness, paralysis, tremors, tics, chorea, athetosis, ataxia, loss of consciousness, seizures
Psychiatric: Negative for extremes of mood, depression, abnormal thought process, other
PMH:
HTN
Vertigo
Hyponatremia
GERD
PSH:
Left-sided hand contracture release
Medications: 
Omeprazole 20mg BID
Meclizine 25mg TID PRN for dizziness
Metoprolol 100mg qdaily
Mirtazapine 15mg at bedtime
Nifedipine 30mg qdaily
Alprazolam 0.5mg BID PRN for anxiety
Losartan/HCTZ 50/12.5mg qdaily
BAC tablet q6h
Allergies:
Pencillin - GI upset
Bee stings - urticaria
Family History:
Mom and dad deceased at unknown age, from unknown cause
Older sister deceased at unknown age, from unknown cause
Older sister, 85YO, lives in Czeck Republic, healthy
Social History:
Tobacco: smokes 15 cigarettes a day for the past 51 years
Alcohol: drinks 4-5 beers per day for the past 51 years
Drugs: Never
Job: Retired chemist
Lives alone, separated from wife, who is alive and healthy
Has two daughters, who are both alive and healthy
Submitted Monday 2022 04 25 ~3:30 pm
Physical Exam:
Vital Signs: 
 T: 97.6 degrees F
 HR: 71 bpm
 BP: 136/69 mmHg 
 RR: 16 breaths/min
 SpO2: 98% on room air
General appearance: Appears to be in no acute distress, dressed in hospital gown
Skin: Warm to touch, dry, intact; no erythema, rashes, lesions, scars, ulcers
Head: Normocephalic, no evidence of trauma, tenderness, or lesions
Eyes: No scleral icterus; pupils equal round and reactive to light and accommodation
Ears: No erythema, lesions, or tenderness in external ears; hearing intact
Nose: Not assessed
Mouth and throat: Not assessed
Neck: No JVD, carotid bruits, adenopathy, thyromegaly; trachea midline
Lymph nodes: No lymphadenopathy 
Chest/Lungs: Resonant to percussion bilaterally; clear to ausculatation bilaterally; 
symmetric chest expansion; no accessory muscle use; no tenderness on palpation; no 
wheezing, crackles, rhonchi
Heart: Regular S1 and S2; no murmurs, rubs, gallops; PMI is nondisplaced, regular rate and 
rhythm; no S3, no S4
Abdomen: Soft abdomen that is nondistended and not tender to palpation; normoactive 
bowel sounds; no hepatosplenomegaly
Extremities: No cyanosis, clubbing, pitting edema; peripheral pulses present bilaterally
Neurologic/developmental: The patient was oriented to time, place, and person; CN 2-12 
intact; sensation, motor, reflexes not assessed
Labs: 
BMP:
122 | 89 | 6
--------------------< 96 Ca: 8.0 
4.7 | 20.1 | 0.7
122 | 86 | 6
--------------------< 111 Ca: 8.
4.4 | 18.4 | 0.8
CBC:
 WBC: 7.7
 Hb: 12.3 
 Hct: 35.1
Anion Gap: 18.0 mEq/L  13.0 mEq/L
Submitted Monday 2022 04 25 ~3:30 pm
Urinalysis: 
 Urine Nitrite: POSITIVE
 Urine Bacteria: MOD
 Urine WBC: 1 /HPF
 Urine Hyaline Casts: 3 /LPF
 Urine Leukocyte Esterase: NEGATIVE
 Urine Urobilinogen: <2.0 mg/dL
 Urine Blood: NEGATIVE
 Urine Bilirubin: NEGATIVE
 Urine Ketones: TRACE
 Urine Glucose: NEGATIVE
 Urine Protein: 1+
 Urine pH: 7.0
 Urine Specific Gravity: 1.008
 Urine Appearance: CLEAR
 Urine Color: Yellow
Troponin T High Sensitivity: 16 ng/L  17 ng/L
Alcohol Ethyl Level: 19.0 mg/dL
Imaging: 
CT head without contrast: no acute intracranial abnormality
EKG: atrial fibrillation with right-axis deviation and nonspecific T wave abnormality
Ventricular Rate 70BPM
Atrial Rate 326BPM
QRS Duration 76ms
Q-T Interval 420ms
QTc 453ms
R Axis 106degrees
T Axis 146degrees
CXR: WNL, no significant findings
Assessment and Plan: 
The patient is a 68 YO Russian-speaking male with a PMH significant for vertigo, 
hypertension, and hyponatremia who presents to RWJUH ED with dizziness that started 
this morning. After feeling dizzy, he laid on the ground where his apartment administrator 
saw him and called EMS. Upon arrival, his blood pressure was ~90/60 with evidence of 
orthostasis. Patient was given NS bolus, which helped to stabilize his blood pressure. CXR 
was within normal limits and noncontrast CT of head showed no acute intracranial 
abnormality. EKG showed evidence of atrial fibrillation. The most likely diagnosis is 
presyncope in the setting of hypovolemic hyponatremia.
Submitted Monday 2022 04 25 ~3:30 pm
Problem #1: Presyncope in setting of Hyponatremia 
DDx: presyncope in setting of hyponatremia, cardiogenic presyncope in setting of atrial 
fibrillation; vertigo exacerbation; atrial fibrillation in setting of alcohol use; orthostatic 
presyncope; beer potomania 
- The most likely diagnosis is presyncope in setting of hyponatremia as patient’s sodium 
level is low at 122 on admission, which can lead to dizziness/lightheadedness. The patient 
also has a history of low sodium with which he has felt dizzy. 
- Orthostatic presyncope is another possible diagnosis as patient had evidence of 
orthostasis when EMS arrived at his apartment. This further stabilized with a fluid bolus. 
- Beer potomania is another possible diagnosis that can explain the patient’s low sodium 
and low volume status. This can be further evaluated with urine and osmolality studies. 
Na = 122 on admission
Hyponatremia diagnosis and management can be evaluated using AAFP’s algorithm: Braun, 
M. M., Barstow, C., & Pyzocha, N. (2015, March 1). Diagnosis and management of sodium 
disorders: Hyponatremia and hypernatremia. American Family Physician. Retrieved April 
25, 2022, from https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0301/p299.html#afp20150301p299-
b13
- Obtain serum osmolality
- Obtain urine studies (urine osmolality, urine sodium)
- Restrict fluids for now in order to increase sodium concentration appropriately
- Consider starting NaCl tablets 1gm per day 
Problem #2: Atrial fibrillation
EKG showed evidence of atrial fibrillation 
Troponins were within normal limits at 16, 17
CHA2DS2-VASc = 2  patient requires anticoagulation  Consider Eliquis 5 mg BID
Obtain echocardiogram to assess for valvular atrial fibrillation 
Problem #3: Alcohol Use Disorder
Alcohol level is elevated at 19
Monitor for withdrawal symptoms
Consider starting CIWA protocol
Problem #4: Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis
Continue to monitor 
Alcohol level is elevated at 19 
Obtain ketone level in blood to see if patient has alcoholic ketosis or starvation ketosis
Problem #5: Vertigo
Continue home meds
Problem #6: HTN
Hold HCTZ 12.5 mg
Continue losartan 50 mg qdaily
Continue nifedipine 30 mg qdaily
Continue metoprolol 100 mg qdaily
Problem #7: GERD
Currently stable
Continue home meds