History and Physical Examination

Date: 5/2/2021
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Chief complaint: 5 Days of bright red blood in the stool
History of Present Illness: Patient is an 84 y/o male with a history of prostate cancer (2011) treated with 
radiation, and open heart surgery for aortic valve replacement with mechanical valve (1990 and 1999) 
on warfarin, presenting with 5 days of bright red blood in his stool. Patient reports that this is not the 
first time he has had this issue. He said he had bright red blood in his stool in 2019, after which he saw 
GI Dr. Wilkins. CT colonography was negative and bleeding was attributed to mucosal atrophy from the 
radiation he received during prostate cancer treatment. She prescribed him a mesalamine suppository 
which resolved the issue. He reports that he attempted to use mesalamine for the past 5 days as well, 
but his bleeding has not subsided. He reports a fall 3 weeks ago, in which he landed on his bilateral 
glutes. 2 days following the fall, he noticed blood in his urine. He saw his urologist 2 days after and 
urinalysis showed hematuria. The hematuria resolved by the end of the week. He then reports the onset 
of hematochezia 2 weeks following the resolution of hematuria. Patient says he lost around 30lbs two 
years ago but his weight has been stable since. He does not report lightheadedness, fatigue, abdominal 
pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, bloating, urinary or bowel changes, or bone/back pain. He says he 
experiences shortness of breath when walking too fast, which resolves when he rests. He does not 
report any chest pain, palpitations, or orthopnea.
Past Medical History:
Hypertension: Diagnosed 2010
Otherwise as reported in HPI
Past Surgical History:
2014: Adrenal gland removal
Otherwise as reported in HPI
Medications:
Metoprolol Extended Release 25 mg by mouth daily
Aspirin Chewable 81 mg by mouth daily
Clonidine 0.1 mg by mouth every 8 hours
Enalapril 20 mg by mouth daily
Hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg by mouth daily
Pravastatin 40 mg by mouth nightly at bedtime
Warfarin: 5 mg. Target INR 2-3
Allergies:
Heparin
Family History:
Mother: Deceased. HTN and HLD
Father: Deceased. HTN
Patient does not have any siblings
There is no family history of cancer or inherited bleeding disorders.
Social History
Patient smoked approximately 3-4 cigarettes per day until his valvar surgery in 1990 and has not smoked 
since. 
Drinks alcohol socially. Approximately 1 drink per week
Does not use illicit drugs
Retired. Used to work for IBM sales
Patient is married to his wife of 55 years
Housing situation is secure and patient lives with his wife
No food insecurities
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: See HPI
HEENT: Reports no headache, ear pain, tinnitus, blurry vision
Cardiovascular: See HPI
Respiratory: See HPI
Gastrointestinal: See HPI
Genitourinary: See HPI
MSK: See HPI
Skin: Patient does not report rashes, petechiae, purpura, bumps, or bruises. 
Psych: Patient does not report depression, anxiety, SI/HI
Physical Exam:.
Vitals: Temp 97.7 (oral), HR 63 and regular rhythm, BP 135/63, RR 17 and not labored, SPO2 99% on 
room air
General: Well appearing male appearing stated age in no apparent distress.
Skin: Normal appearing with no discoloration
HEENT: Normocephalic and atraumatic. Pupils equally round and reactive to light. To tenderness to 
palpation in the nasal sinuses. No erythema, post nasal drainage, or discoloration of the throat. 
Neck: No cervical lymphadenopathy. No palpable masses. Trachea midline.
Pulm: Lungs are clear to auscultation. No crackles/rales/wheezes/rhonci. Bilateral resonance to 
percussion. Normal tactile fremitus. 
Cardiac: Loud S1 and S2 (due to mechanical valve). Regular rhythm. Slight early diastolic murmur. 
GI: Abdomen is nontender, nondistended, no palpable masses, and bowel sounds are present in all four 
quadrants and are normal. The liver span is approximately 9 cm and there is no splenomegaly.
Extremities: There is no edema. 5/5 strength in Bilateral upper and lower extremities. Reflexes 2+ 
bilaterally in Upper and lower extremities. 
Neuro: Alert and oriented x3. Sensation to light touch and pinprick is intact. Sensation to vibration and 
proprioception is intact. 
Psych: Normal affect. Very pleasant and cooperative. 
Labs & Imaging:
Na: 140, K: 4.3, Cl: 100, HCO3: 23.6, BUN 22, Cr: 0.8, Ca: 9.5
WBC: 6.0 / Hb: 11.7 / Hct: 35.1 / Plt: 154 
-Diff: N: 54.8% L: 30.9% Mo: 9.4.% Eo: 3.1% Baso: 1.8%
PT: 25.4 (INR: 2.25)
No imaging performed yet
Assessment
Patient is an 84 y/o male with a history of prostate cancer (2011) treated with radiation, and open heart 
surgery for valve replacement (1990 and 1999) on warfarin, presenting with 5 days of bright red blood in 
his stool. Patients Hb is 11.1, and his INR is 2.25. 
1. Hematochezia and anemia
Patient has been suffering from 5 days of bright red blood with his stool. The most likely explanation for 
this patient’s symptoms is hemorrhagic diverticulitis. However, given the patients past medical history, 
we should also consider angiodysplasia (Heyde Syndrome). Though Heyde is rare, the patients prosthetic 
aortic valve puts him at increased risk to develop this coagulopathy. Other things to consider on our 
differential are bleeding from friable mucosa due to past radiation, however this is less likely given how 
long ago he got radiation. We should also consider colon cancer, colonic polyps, and ulcerative colitis. 
2. Shortness of breath
Patient reports shortness of breath on exertion. This is likely due to his anemia, and can also be seen as 
a presenting symptom with Heyde syndrome. However, we should also consider other causes of S.O.B. 
The patient’s history as a smoker makes it possible that he could have COPD, though this is less likely 
given how long ago he quit smoking and his low pack per year history. Patient could also be suffering 
from asthma; however, he does not report increased S.O.B at night or with environmental exposures. 
We should also rule out cardiovascular causes of S.O.B. Such as CHF and CAD.
Plan:
1. Hematochezia.
Patient needs to undergo a colonoscopy. However, this is complicated by his warfarin use, therapeutic 
INR, and Heparin allergy. We should stop warfarin. Once patient is not therapeutic (IBR less than 2), we 
should start patient on bivalrudin or argatroban to decrease stroke risk from his mechanical heart valve 
and perform the colonoscopy. Once we get the colonoscopy results, we can be more well versed on 
what we are dealing with. If this is not an option, we can consider another CT cologram. We should also 
continue to monitor the patients Hb and transfuse if it drops below 7. 
2. Shortness of breath.
To rule out other causes of S.O.B. not related to patient’s anemia, we should get PFTs and ABGs on 
patient. We should also consider EKG, Echo, and stress test to rule out cardiovascular causes of S.O.B. 
Although I do not believe this is as pressing given the patients reporting no chest pain, palpitations, 
syncope, or orthopnea. 
