
MS-III History and Physical

CC: "swelling and pain in both legs"
Source: Patient, alert and oriented

HPI:
The patient is a 23-year-old male who was in good health until age 18 when he was suffered from running 
injuries. The patient stopped running competitively but continued strenuous exercise and was 
diagnosed with chronic compartment syndrome at age 20. The patient initially elected for 
physical therapy but chose elective surgery to alleviate his pain. The patient had surgery a week prior to 
admission on 7/27/2021 to treat his chronic compartment syndrome. He had a bilateral fasciotomy with 
two incisions made on each leg laterally to access two compartments in each lower extremity. The patient 
began pain management with Toradol and Percocet after surgery. The patient reported no pain and could 
ambulate with crutches until 7/31/2021, three days prior to admission, when he began to have severe pain 
in both his lower extremities. He could no longer ambulate on his own and became bedridden. Two days 
prior to admission, on 8/1/21, the patient called his physician regarding erythema, swelling, and pain in 
his legs. He began Augmentin on twelve hours prior to presentation on 8/2/21 for suspicion of infection. 
The pain became significantly worse as time passed by. He attempted to use the bathroom with the 
assistance of his mother around 11 AM 8/3/2021 when his ankle hit the wall and the pain became 
unbearable. The patient was transported to the Emergency Department within the hour via 
ambulance. The patient currently presents with unbearable pain in his lower extremities with more pain in 
his left lower extremity compared to his right lower extremity. He currently rates his pain as 10/10 on a 
scale from 0 to 10 with 10 being the worst pain. The pain and associated symptoms are worse on his left 
leg. The pain is described as sharp, tingling, and like static with occasional numbness. In the calves, the 
patient feels tightness. The pain radiates from his incision to his hip area. The patient feels pressure in his 
hips bilaterally. The pain in the left radiates to his gluteal area. Bilaterally, pain radiates distally to the 
ankles but is bearable in the feet to the toes. The patient reports his left ankle is also tender, swollen, and 
cannot bear any movement or touch.
The patient reports muscle and bone pain in the lower extremities, arthralgia in both ankles, edema in 
both ankles, occasional numbness in legs, and mild nausea. Patient declines fever, chills, shortness of 
breath, cough, chest pain, abdominal pain, vomiting, and loss of sensation in legs.
The patient also has a history of prostatitis in 2017. It was treated with pelvic floor therapy, amitriptyline, 
magnesium, and quercetin. The patient no longer takes medication since 7/27/21 due to his surgery. 
Family and social history are non-contributory.
Since arrival, the patient has had x-rays of the left ankle, tibia and fibula and duplex venous ultrasound of 
the right and left lower extremities. He has received 1gm IV ceftriaxone, IV morphine and IV fentanyl. 
The patient reports his pain has not subsided and remains a 10/10.
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
Review Of Systems: as per HPI
General - denies fever and chills
HEENT - denies headache and change in vision
Respiratory - denies cough and shortness of breath
Cardiovascular - reports edema in the ankles. Denies chest pain and palpitations
Gastrointestinal - reports slight nausea and constipation. Denies abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea
Genitourinary - denies pain and dysuria
Musculoskeletal - reports pain in legs bilaterally extending from toes to hips. Pain on left side greater than 
right side
Heme/Lymph - denies bruising and bleeding at site of incision
Endocrine - reports episodes of feeling warm and then suddenly cold
Dermatology - reports erythema and swelling in lower extremities
Neurology - reports occasional numbness in legs bilaterally. Denies loss of sensation in legs and can 
move toes.
Psychiatric – declines depression and suicidal ideation
Past Medical History:
As per HPI:
- Chronic compartment syndrome in 2018
- Prostatitis in 2017
Past surgical history: as per HPI
- 7/27/21 bilateral lower extremity chronic compartment syndrome fasciotomy. Two incisions were made 
on each extremity and two compartments were treated on each extremity.
No past hospitalizations
Medications:
Augmentin: 2 tablets with 1 at night on 8/2/21 and 1 before 11 AM 8/3/21; patient does not state doses
Toradol qid; course completed 7/31/2021; patient does not state doses
Percocet qid; patient does not state doses
OTC: none
Herbal: herbal tea once/week
Allergies:
Mefloquine - Unknown
Bactrim - Rash and itchiness; no hives or anaphylaxis
Immunizations:
Has had both doses of Pfizer COVID vaccine.
Family History:
Father – alive; age not stated; no medical conditions
Mother – alive; age not stated; hypothyroidism diagnosed 2 years ago
Paternal grandfather: death at 51 due to unknown cardiac origin
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
Social History:
Living - lives in apartment in Manhattan; Currently with parents for support post-surgery
Occupation/Education - Investment Banker; Completed Bachelor in Finance at Fordham University
Travel - None recently
COVID – no exposure to sick contacts recently
Diet - drinks green tea weekly; reports eating 3 meals a day and often unhealthy diet due to occupation
Habits:
 Alcohol - Drinks 3-4 drinks over the weekends
 Tobacco/Smoking/Vaping – never used tobacco, e-cigarettes, or cigarettes
 Drugs - uses marijuana occasionally
Physical Exam:
General: patient lying uncomfortably in bed avoiding any movement and in pain; alert, responsive and 
oriented but severely distressed.
VITALS: Aug 3 11:51 [within last 24 hours]
Temperature: 98.2 Tmax: 98.2 
HR: 81 (81 - 102)
BP: 115/75 (115/75 - 127/90)
RR: 18 (18 - 18) 
SpO2: 99% (98% - 99%)
Height: 60 kg
Weight: 172.72 cm
BMI: 20.1
Pain Score: 10/10
HEENT:
● Head - atraumatic normocephalic; no facial piercings
● Eyes - eyebrows present; eyelashes present; eyelids normal; no ptosis; clear sclera; extraocular 
movement preserved
● Ears – no piercings; gross hearing preserved
● Nose – no rhinitis; no deformities or lesions; no discharge
● Throat - Normal coloring of lips; teeth normal; does not wear dentures; normal tongue 
movements
● Neck – no JVD
Back: N/A
Respiratory: no trauma; lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally with no wheezes, rales or rhonchi
Cardiovascular: no trauma; regular rhythm and rate; no rubs, murmurs, or gallops; bilateral dosalis pedis 
pulses palpated 2+
Abdomen: no masses; normoactive bowel sounds; soft, nontender, nondistended; no hepatosplenomegaly
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
Extremities: right lower extremity bandaged from ankle to knee; left lower extremity erythematous with 
pain on lateral side where incisions are located. No pain on medial lower extremities bilaterally. Left 
lower extremity incision clean with no discharge or pus. Left ankle swelling.
Dermatology: erythema on left lower extremity; no rash; no tattoos, piercings or moles; no tanning or 
freckles; no petechiae or bruising
Neurology: The patient is alert, attentive and oriented. Speech is clear and fluent. The patient is 
cooperative and denies suicidal ideation. Long-term memory intact. The patient is not depressed. 
CN II-XII grossly intact. Sensation intact in legs. Patient can move toes bilaterally.
Psychology: alert and oriented; responds appropriately to questions; cooperative with speech and 
language intact. Denies depression and suicidal ideation.
Labs:
LABS (last 24h) [retrieved on 03 Aug 2021]:
135 | 98 | 14
--------------------< 81 Ca: 9.7 [08/03 @ 12:25]
4.0 | 25.7 | 0.8
WBC: 8.8 / Hb: 15.8 / Hct: 46.8 / Plt: 299 [08/03 @ 12:25]
-- Diff: N:73.20% L:16.8% Mo:8.8% Eo:0.7% Baso:0.2%
Imaging:
1. LEFT ANKLE X-RAYS ON 8/03 16:13
a. COMPARISON: No pertinent prior studies have been submitted for comparison.
b. TECHNIQUE: 3 view(s) of the left ankle were obtained.
c. FINDINGS:
Bones/Joint spaces/mortise: No fracture, dislocation, or other osseous 
abnormality. Ankle mortise preserved on these nonstressed views.
Soft tissues/Other: Soft tissue swelling lateral malleolus. 
d. IMPRESSION:
Lateral soft tissue swelling without evidence of fracture.
2. LEFT TIBIA/FIBULA X-RAYS ON 8/03 16:09
a. COMPARISON: No pertinent prior studies have been submitted for comparison.
b. TECHNIQUE: 4 view(s) of the left tibia and fibula were obtained.
c. FINDINGS: 
Bones/Joint Spaces: No fracture, dislocation, or other osseous abnormality.
Soft tissues/Other: Unremarkable
d. IMPRESSION:
Left tibia and fibula: Within normal limits.
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
3. BILATERAL LOWER EXTREMITY DUPLEX DOPPLER SCANS ON 8/03 14:53:
a. Findings:
- Right: The deep venous system is patent with normal spontaneity, phasicity, 
augmentation, and compressibility of the common femoral, deep femoral, femoral, and 
popliteal veins. There is normal compression and color flow of the gastrocnemius, veins. 
There is normal compression of the great saphenous system.
There is no evidence of deep or superficial venous thrombosis.
- Left: The deep venous system is patent with normal spontaneity, phasicity, 
augmentation, and compressibility of the common femoral, deep femoral, femoral, and 
popliteal veins. There is normal compression and color flow of the gastrocnemius, 
peroneal, posterior tibial and calf veins. There is normal compression of the great and 
small saphenous system.
There is no evidence of deep or superficial venous thrombosis.
Assessment and Plan:
The patient is a 23-year-old male with a past medical history significant for chronic compartment 
syndrome and recent bilateral lower extremity fasciotomy who presented to the Emergency Department 
for severe bilateral lower extremity pain, left greater than right, radiating from the toes to the hips. 
Physical exam was remarkable for erythema and tenderness in the bilateral lower extremities with 
swelling in left ankle. Incision sites on left lower extremity are non-purulent with pain localized to 
surgical sites on lateral lower extremities. 
Since arrival, the patient has received ceftriaxone, morphine, fentanyl, and saline. He continues to be in 
pain and will be admitted for treatment.
Problem List:
1. Pain in bilateral lower extremities
2. Prostatitis 
1. Pain in bilateral lower extremities:
 Fasciitis
The patient most likely has fasciitis considering his physical exam. He has severe pain in his 
bilateral lower extremities with left greater than right. There is swelling and erythema on the left 
lateral lower extremity and swelling in the left ankle. The incisions from surgery have no 
discharge and were visualized as clean. Labs and x-rays were unremarkable. DVT was ruled out 
by the Doppler ultrasound. The patient was not on prophylactic antibiotic therapy as well.
The most likely diagnosis is fasciitis given the physical presentation and severity of pain. 
Additionally, the patient is still able to feel sensation and move his toes. There are concerns for 
necrotizing fasciitis and further testing is required.
 Cellulitis
Cellulitis is another highly likely diagnosis. There is erythema and swelling in the wound area. 
However, the patient denies fever and there is no blistering on the skin. The pain also radiates 
from the toes to the hips. The patient’s skin findings are non-purulent. However, the diagnosis 
cannot be ruled out.
 Septic arthritis
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
The patient has swelling in his ankle. He could have septic arthritis secondary to infection postsurgery. However, the patient’s white blood count and temperature are within normal limits. He 
also denies fever and chills. The diagnosis is less likely. 
 Acute compartment syndrome
The patient could have continued pain that was not completely treated by surgery.
 Stasis dermatitis
The patient could have stasis dermatitis from bedrest post-surgery. However, Doppler ultrasound 
and physical exam for peripheral pulses presented with normal blood flow. Additionally, the pain 
and edema would remain unexplained by this diagnosis. Thus, this diagnosis is highly unlikely.
 Deep venous thrombosis
DVT has been ruled out due to Doppler ultrasound findings. Additionally, the patient had 2+ 
pedal pulses bilaterally. 
The patient will be admitted inpatient. IV Vancomycin at 1 mg/minute for 60 minutes should be 
administered tid upon admission. Zosyn should be co-administered 4 hours after initial Vancomycin 
infusion 3.375g over 30 minutes tid. Clindamycin should be considered if the patient's condition does not 
improve. Order CBC, CMP, CRP, ESR, and U/A for further analysis and monitoring. Order MRI of 
bilateral lower extremities to visualize soft tissue. 0.9% IV saline bolus should be administered if the 
patient cannot tolerate medicine and liquids. Heparin should be administered to prevent DVT given the 
patient’s bedridden state. Consult with Infectious Disease, General Surgery and Orthopedics.
2. Prostatitis:
The patient is currently asymptomatic and no longer taking Mg and quercetin. He has also discontinued 
therapy. The patient should follow up with primary care after resolution of bilateral lower extremity 
pain.
FENP: none/replete PRN/regular diet as tolerated/lovenox
Dispo: Pediatric Surgery
Discussed with attending and residents.
Dimpie Shah, MS-III
MTS Team D
Rec’d Wed 8/4 10 pm
Evidence Based Medicine
 Question: How do you diagnose and treat necrotizing fasciitis?
 Summary
Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare disease that can be classified into two types based on microbiology. 
Type I is a polymicrobial infection with specifically at least one anaerobic and one aerobic 
organism while Type II is a monomicrobial infection. Type II infections are most often 
Streptococcus pyogenes infections. The most common sites of infection are the extremities with 
the upper limb being the most common and lower extremities second most common. 
Necrotizing fasciitis can often be confused for cellulitis and early diagnosis can often prevent 
fatal outcomes. This condition should be considered in differentials if the patient presents with 
“erythema, tenderness, warm skin, and swelling”. Skin conditions such as blistering and necrosis 
are usually late signs of necrotizing fasciitis. Laboratory findings are often nonspecific, but 
studies have suggested that WBC > 15.4 and Na+ < 135 could potentially distinguish between 
necrotizing and non-necrotizing tissue. MRI can provide the most suggestive diagnosis and 
differentiate between necrotizing and non-necrotizing tissue. Surgical exploration, however, is the 
most definitive and diagnostic. 
Treatment requires surgical debridement for survival as soon as possible. If diagnosis is delated 
by 24+ hours, mortality significantly increases. Additionally, antibiotic therapy should be started 
immediately. A multidrug therapy including a high-dose penicillin, clindamycin and 
fluoroquinolone or aminoglycoside is recommended to cover all gram-negative bacteria. If there 
is penicillin resistant, a third-generation cephalosporin can be used instead. Vancomycin could be 
used for suspicion of Staphylococcus aureus.
Essentially, this is a life-threatening emergency and if there is any clinical suspicion for 
necrotizing fasciitis, providers should react as quickly as possible for diagnosis and treatment.
 Citations
o Lancerotto L, Tocco I, Salmaso R, Vindigni V, Bassetto F. Necrotizing fasciitis: 
Classification, diagnosis, and management. The journal of trauma and acute care 
surgery. 2012;72(3):560-566. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e318232a6b3
o Stevens, D.L. & Baddour, L.M. (2021). Necrotizing soft tissue infections. In E.L. Baron 
(Ed.), UpToDate. Retrieved August 4, 2021. From 
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/necrotizing-soft-tissue-infections