
Location: 6 North
Patient appears to be a reliable narrator but has inconstancies or gaps in his understanding of 
his complex medical history.
Note: Patient is a transfer from RWJ Hamilton for anemia and thrombocytopenia workup
CC at RWJ Hamilton: lower back pain x 4 days
HPI: 26M, originally from India, who had no medical history until 2016 when studying abroad in 
New Zealand. He sought outpatient medical care from a PCP when he noticed blurry vision. He 
was found to have a blood pressure in the range 200/120 and ultimately admitted to a local 
hospital. Currently, he reports that his blood pressures are well controlled on his home 
medication regimen. He checks his blood pressure every few days, and they are normally in the 
130’s-140’s, but every other week will be in the 150’s.
In 2016, he reports that he was found to have a “shrunken” right kidney, later described as 
being “10-20% functional.” He was also found to have severe left renal artery stenosis that 
required surgical bypass using a venous graft from his right leg. After this procedure, he was 
found to be anemic and required a blood transfusion. He reports not knowing if he had ever 
been anemic before this procedure, but reports that since this transfusion he is always found to 
be anemic on any bloodwork, with hemoglobin in the range of 8-10. He also reports a history of 
low platelet counts, in the range of 70-100. He reports that his only other lab abnormality is his 
creatinine, which is normally 1.8 – 2.4. This is the only transfusion he has needed besides this 
current admission.
Before his 2016 transfusion was finished, he felt short of breath, and was found to have blood 
cloths in both of his legs and multiple cloths in his lungs. He reports that he was hospitalized as 
a result of these clots for 20 days. He was discharged on Warfarin, dosage unknown, which he 
took for two years. To the best of his knowledge, his clots resolved with this therapy. After his 
discharge, he returned home to India for follow up care. At that time, he was found to have clots 
in his grafted vein, which required surgical stent placement. This stent was removed 3 months 
later by a second procedure. He does not have records of any of these procedures.
In 2019, he developed an ulcer on his left lateral ankle. He said it began as a small lesion, 
approximately 2 cm in diameter, but eventually grew to be 6 cm over the course of 
approximately one month, at which time it began to encompass about one cm of the dorsal 
aspect of his foot. He never sought medical care for this lesion. It eventually resolved on its own
over the course of approximately the next one month. He describes its color as dark blue and 
black, and that it began to peel and bleed slightly, never enough blood to require more than a 
daily change of dressing (band aids), and never soaking a dressing. It was never foul smelling. 
He never saw any pustular exudate. It was tender to the touch. He was always able to bear 
weight, and never limited his activities. He cannot report any inciting incident or trauma. 
In 2020, he moved to the United States. In 2020, he also began to have a similar lesion on the 
lateral aspect of his right ankle. It is described similarly as above, “coming and going every few 
months.” For this, he has sought medical care four times, three times at University Medical 
Center at Princeton and once at RWJ Hamilton. He was admitted each time for a skin biopsies,
but was told they were never infected. He has never had a deep tissue or bone infection at 
Document1 10/10/19
these ulcer sites, and has never had a blood infection They were never surgically debrided, 
neither in the OR nor at bedside.
His chief complaint for this current admission began on Friday 06/04/2021. He hurt his back 
moving packages at work. He describes it as a dull, constant pain in his lower back, at the level 
of his sacrum. It is worse with movement. It does not radiate. It is not associated with any 
numbness, including the saddle region, and he reports no urinary or fecal difficulty or 
incontinence. He rates the pain at an 8/10. Because this pain was constant all weekend, he 
sought medical care from his PCP that Monday, the day prior to presentation to the ED. She 
recommended over-the-counter medications, and that evening he took two Tylenol capsules 
(dosage unknown, but within instructions on the bottle), an unknown muscle relaxant, and used 
a heating pad. He woke up the next morning still in pain and decided to go to the ED at RWJ 
Hamilton.
As part of the workup for his lower back pain in the ED, he had a CT scan without contrast, 
which he reports showed S3 and S4 vertebral fractures. The CT also showed a distended 
bladder retaining urine and possible fecal retention. He was admitted for these findings. A foley 
catheter was inserted and emptied his bladder; it remained in place without urinary trial for the 
remainder of his hospitalization until his transfer. He was able to defecate with no intervention 
the next day without issue, no incontinence, strain, pain, or blood. He had an MRI the following 
day for his back pain, but was unsure of these results. He was told to follow up with orthopedics
outpatient for these results.
The patient reports that he was found to be anemic on bloodwork in the ED, with a hemoglobin
of 7. He is not sure what his platelets were at the time. He reports no symptoms of anemia, any 
feelings of weakness, fatigue, lightheadedness, increased heart rate, or palpitations at this time. 
He also reports no obvious signs of bleeding, no new bruising, hemachezia, melena, or 
abdominal pain.
The morning of hospital day 1, the patient was again found to be anemic, with a hemoglobin of 
6.5, down to 6.3 on repeat testing. He reports initially refusing a blood transfusion after his 
reaction described above, but ultimately was convinced. He received a red blood cell 
transfusion at about 3 pm, and by 10 pm reports feeling short of breath and having chills. He 
says that his oxygen saturation was 70%. He was found to have a clot in the right leg and was 
transferred to the MICU. He says the details at this time are hazy to him, but there he was 
“stabilized” with a transfusion of platelets and a treatment of steroids (medication and dosage 
unknown). He was also told that he as “a little bit of a pneumonia” in what he believes is his left 
lung, though it may have been the right side, and he was started on antibiotics (medication and 
dosage unknown).
On hospital day 3 he was downgraded for the MICU and prepared for transfer to RWJUH New 
Brunswick, but this did not occur until hospital day 5 because it was the weekend. He reports 
requiring not additional treatment and feeling good on hospital days 3 through 5, though he 
does report some fatigue. He says his back pain was and is currently unchanged, and just 
barely adequately controlled with a push-button medication, though he is not sure what. Despite 
the pain, he was able to ambulate to shower and defecate on days 3 through 5, though he 
remained with a foley catheter.
From hospital day 3 to the present, he reports some continued fatigue that he attributes to 
“being sick” and not getting sleep in the hospital. He reports new bruising and irritation at IV 
sites on both arms. He reports no current shortness of breath, cough, fever, chills, weakness,
Document1 10/10/19
lightheadedness, palpitations, chest pain, bleeding, or saddle numbness. Patient reports no 
history, recent or lifetime, of rashes, hives, joint paints, arthritis, morning joint stiffness, 
myalgias, or cold or discolored fingers. 
ROS: As throughout HPI. 
PMHx: As above.
PSHx: As above. Left renal artery bypass, possible stent placement. 
HOME MEDICATIONS:
Labetalol 400 BID
Amlodipine 10mg BID
Clonidine 0.6 BID
Bumetanide 1mg daily
ALLERGIES: No known drug allergies. No other allergies. 
FAMILY Hx:
- Father, alive at 50, type-II diabetes, “recently” diagnosed with HTN. Paternal grandfather 
medical history not fully known but reported to be significant for hypertension, diagnosed in late 
adulthood. 
- Mother, alive at 52, no known health issues
- Sister, alive at 30, no known health issues. 
SOCIAL Hx: 
- From India, moved to US in 2020. 
- Lives with his sister, her husband, and their two kids.
- Works in package distribution for an electronics company.
- Drinks a beer about once a year. Has never smoked cigarettes. Has never used other drugs, 
including marijuana, cocaine, or IV drugs.
- Pt. has insurance, but expressed concerns about being able to pay for his hospital bills and 
being out of work. 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION:
VITALS (last 24h):
T: 97.6 Tmax: 97.6 @ 14 Jun 10:38
HR: 70 (70 - 70), regular rhythm
BP: 142/89 (142/89 - 142/89)
RR: 20 (20 - 20) | SpO2: 95% (95% - 95%) on room air
General: Well-developed, well-nourished, man of medium skin tone. He is lying in stretcher with 
head elevated, in no acute distress. 
HEENT: No signs of trauma. Sclerae non-injected, anicteric. Moist mucus membranes. No 
posterior pharyngeal erythema. No oral lesions. Normal dentition. Trachea midline, no 
lymphadenopathy. 
Cardiac: Regular rate and rhythm. S1 S2 present. I/VI holosystolic murmur, heard best in the left 
fifth intercostal space, that does not radiate to neck or shoulder. No rubs or gallops.
Pulm: Patient breathing without accessory muscle use. Good inspiratory movement. Clear to 
auscultation bilaterally. No wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. 
Abdominal: +BS, soft, non-tender, non-distended. No rebound tenderness, no guarding.
Document1 10/10/19
Back: Tenderness only in the sacral region, vertebral equivalents were not measured, but 
approximately the lower border of the hip. Non-tender lateral from the spine or in lumbar region.
Extremities: No edema, clubbing, or cyanosis. Radial, dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses 
2+ bilaterally.
Neuro: No focal deficits. Awake, alert, and orientated x3. 5/5 Motor strength in upper and lower 
extremities bilaterally. Sensation grossly intact in extremities bilaterally, and in saddle region.
Skin: Right ankle was wrapped in a white, dry bandage that was adherent to patient’s wound 
when removing. Nontender, non-swollen, blue/black ulcers are seen on the bilateral ankles, 
without pus drainage, bleeding, or exudate. On the right side, lesions cover entire lateral ankle, 
sparing 3 cm up from base of the foot, extending to the midline of the dorsal surface, 3 cm 
towards toes. On the left side, the lesion appears older, with grey/green border. It is contained 
to the ankle, approximately 4 cm across and 2 cm tall. On the left upper extremity, two nontender bruises are present in the left anterior cubital fossa, measuring approximately 2 cm 
across. 
Psych: Normal mood and affect.
LABS: (LAST 72 HOURS)
134 | 102 | 47
--------------------< 96 Ca: 8.9 [06/14 @ 14:24]
4.7 | 16.4 | 2.0
AST: 43 / ALT: 41 / AlkPhos: 402 / Bili: 0.3 / Dir: <0.2 / Prot: 7.4 / Alb: 3.6 [06/14 @ 14:24]
WBC: 10.2 / Hb: 8.3 / Hct: 25.2 / Plt: 106 MCV: 80.4 [06/14 @ 14:24]
PT: 16.2 / PTT: 138 / INR: 1.44 [06/14 @ 14:24]
ASSESSMENT & PLAN:
26M with PMH of anemia, thrombocytopenia, chronic kidney disease s/p renal bypass and 
stent, unknown transfusion reaction significant for multi-focal thrombosis and hypoxia, and 
poorly healing ulcers, who presented to the ED of RWJUH Hamilton on 06/05 with 4 days of 
back pain following lifting packages at work. Imaging is reported to have found S3 and S4 
fractures, with a course complicated by anemia, thrombocytopenia, a possible transfusion 
reaction requiring MICU transfer, and a right lower extremity DVT in the context of prior bilateral
DVT and PE, s/p 2 years of Warfarin. He is now admitted to RWJUH New Brunswick for further 
workup of anemia, thrombocytopenia apparent hypercoagulability, and chronic skin ulcers on 
his ankles.
#Thrombocytopenia, right lower extremity DVT, history of multifocal thromboses
- The combination of thrombocytopenia and clots in the context of anemia suggests multiple 
etiologies of underlying disease but also of complications thereof. Additionally, the #anemia is of 
unknown significance, as it may be due to CKD or the same pathology as his thrombocytopenia.
- Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is characterized by thrombocytopenia and 
anemia due to microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Microthrombi and resulting microvascular 
damage may also explain his poorly healing ulcers (due to poor blood supply) and renal 
complications. Microvascular damage to the right kidney may have resulted in hypoperfusion
and atrophy, while damage to the left led to vascular changes that resulted in his extreme 
hypertension. Diagnosis is supported by schistocytes on blood smear and analysis for 
underlying ADAMST13 protein dysfunction.
- Immune thrombocytopenic purpura can present with thrombocytopenia, though this 
patient lacks purpura or any signs of bleeding, beyond bruising, commonly seen in ITP.
- Myelofibrosis can present with decreased cell counts, resulting in anemia and 
thrombocytopenia. This is diagnosed on a blood smear with increase megakaryocytes, but the 
Document1 10/10/19
gold standard is a spinal tap. Consult heme for risks of spinal tap in context of thrombocytopenia 
and signs of bone fragility.
- Myeloproliferative disorders can result in anemia and thrombocytopenia, as other cell 
types are made at the expense of megakaryocytes and erythrocytes. Consider heme consult, 
serum analysis, and urine analysis for immunoglobulin studies. 
- Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is an acute response to heparin, and is 
unlikely to explain his chronically low platelet counts. However, there may be an element of HIT 
overlying his existing coagulopathy, which may be mis-diagnosed as his otherwise unexplained 
transfusion reaction. His 4T’s score is 3 (positive thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, heparin but 
indeterminate score for other etiology of the clots), an overall intermediate score, suggesting 
further workup. Further workup includes anti-heparin antibody and serotonin release assay (gold 
standard). Heparin should be held until these results are determined. 
- Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), as with HIT, does not explain this 
patients chronic symptoms, but may be the cause of his history of acute decompensations, and 
is a serious diagnosis that should always be on this differential. 
- Anti-phospholipid antibody can result in the combination of thrombocytopenia with 
microthrombi. This can be diagnosed with a send-out test for this antibody, and is associated 
with other auto-immune disorders such as lupus.
- Non-specific studies of fibrinogen, fibrin degradation products, co-factor deficiencies, and 
mixing studies would help inform some of the more specific tests described above.
- Consult heme for difficult anti-coagulation therapy. Patient currently has a right lower extremity 
DVT, and has a long history of clots.
- Order bilateral lower and upper extremity Doppler ultrasound for DVTs. Consider CTA 
given history of PE despite lack of physical exam findigns. 
- Heparin should be avoided until HIT can be ruled out. 
- Warfarin requires an activation period, patient has evidence of currently being in a 
hypercoagulable state. 
- Consult rheumatology for possible autoimmune etiologies listed above. Consider evaluation for 
anti-phospholipid antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody for lupus. 
#Anemia
- Likely etiology is a combination of anemia of chronic disease, underlying autoimmune or 
hematologic disorder as above, in combination with decreased erythropoietin production in 
context of single functional kidney and chronic kidney disease.
- Iron studies unlikely to be helpful given patients’ recent transfusion and likely multi-factorial 
etiology of anemia.
- LDH and haptoglobin may be still be informative. B12 and folate can inform nutritional status. 
- Consider erythropoietin shots outpatient, possibly following treatment and improvement of 
underlying disease when we can better assess anemia of chronic disease vs. CKD.
- Murmur may be due to anemia, but patient would benefit from echocardiogram. 
#Lower extremity ulcers
- Pt. has multi-year history of bilateral, poorly healing lateral ankle ulcers. 
- Unclear etiology, though likely a venous-statis ulcer over arterial damage based on location 
(ankles vs. tips of toes). Differential includes be venous status due to long history of to DVTs vs 
microangiopathic, as above. 
- Will consult wound care, consider general surgery consult for debridement, derm and ID 
consult for further workup of non-healing skin lesions. 
#Hypertension, CKD
Document1 10/10/19
- Patient is on a high dose of very high potency hypertensive medications at a young age. Will 
initiate home medications as written, working with pharmacy, with holding parameters. 
- Will watch BP and HR closely out of concern that high doses may be in part due to a 
history of medication non-compliance such that a new consistent inpatient medication regimen
may make patient hypotensive. 
- Unclear etiology, possibly essential hypertension, possibly congenital dysplasia, may be the 
result of microvascular damage, as above. 
- Order renal artery bilateral duplex ultrasounds to assess for possible renal artery stenosis, 
which can be addressed in young patient (vs. poor outcomes in older patients with underlying 
atherosclerotic etiology), insight into past surgical history, current CKD status. Consider further 
imaging studies for these considerations.
- Right kidney reportedly has only 10-20% function with the left kidney functioning normally. All 
interventions on left kidney must be done in the context that this is his one functional kidney, 
and any decrease in its function would likely leave him dependent on hemodialysis. 
- Consult renal. 
#Sacral fracture
- Patient reports his pain is poorly controlled. Will being a combination of long-acting opioids for 
relief and short-acting for breakthrough pain. 
- These fractures appear pathologic based on the lack of clear trauma. Though the suggested 
plan was outpatient follow-up, causes of bone weakness can be assessed inpatient. Given his 
history of CKD, PTH, calcium, and activated vitamin D should be ordered. 
- Will consult ortho for their recommendations on further imaging or testing. 
- Will remove catheter for void trial to assess for cauda equina syndrome (CAS). Patient 
reported no difficulty urinating or incontinence prior to presentation to the ED, and has not had 
other symptoms of CAS such as difficult defecating or saddle numbness. 
Document1 10/10/19
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia was high on our differential for this individual, as he likely 
received heparin during his stay at RWJ Hamilton and had an unexplained clotting disorder. We 
discussed the “4T’s” of HIT, which are thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, timing (meaning recent 
heparin administration), and no other explanation for the thrombi. I was surprised to see that 
they are actually incredibly well supported by the literature, and not just a mnemonic to help 
students remember and recognize the presentation of HIT on exams.
Predictive value of the 4Ts scoring system for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis 
