
M3 IM Clerkship
H&P #1
24 June 2021
CC: “I have felt tired for the past week”
HPI: 62 year old male with a PMH that includes DMT2, HTN, rheumatic fever / 
mitral valve surgery / AICD / HFrEF presents to the ED after being sent from his 
PCP with evidence of atrial flutter. The patient emigrated from Ghana in 
1999. He provided his own history and appears reliable. He describes new onset 
fatigue in the past week and is now only able to walk 13 steps before feeling 
fatigued and SOB, despite previously being an active adult. He also notes a 
sensation of his heart racing during the same period. He denies chest pain or 
discomfort. He also reports decreased fluid intake and dizziness when rising from 
a sitting to standing position. He denies paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea; he sleeps
with pillows but says this in not because of his heart failure. He reports that he 
takes his blood pressure at home and saw it as low as 85/55 four days ago, very 
low compared to his baseline. He denies syncope. He was vaccinated against 
COVID19 with last dose in March 2021 and denies recent travel.
Medications and allergies:
Aspirin 81mg daily
Carvedilol 25mg bid
Atorvastatin 401mg at bedtime
Furosemide 40mg daily
Lantus 35 units at bedtime
Novolog 10 units with meals
Lactulose 20mg daily
Metformin 500mg bid
Dropped amlodipine 5mg daily and losartan 80mg daily last week
No known allergies
PMH:
Rheumatic fever as a child, complicated by mitral valve disease
DMT2 (1999)
HTN (prior to 1999)
PSH:
Mitral valve repair/replacement in 2007
AICD placement in 2009
FH:
No known medical problems for parents
2 sisters have HTN
SH:
Patient has been on disability since 2009
He lives at home with his 14 year-old daughter
Endorses alcohol use when in military years ago but not since diagnosis with 
heart disease
Describes occasional tobacco use when in teens
Denies any other illicit drug use
ROS:
Constitutional: fatigue for one week, denies fever
Skin: denies any new rashes
HEENT: denies any vision changes, sore throat
CV: endorses palpitations / orthopnea / ankle swelling. Denies chest pain and 
PND
Pulm: SOB with exertion. Denies cough.
GU: describes lower urine output consistent with lower fluid intake. No other 
changes to GU habits
GI: denies N/V. No changes in bowel habits.
Vitals:
HR 98 BP 132/97 SpO2 100% T 97.8
PE:
General: Patient is generally well appearing and well-nourished and answers 
questions appropriately. Positive mood and no overt signs of anxiety.
CV: Irregular rate and rhythm with audible S1/2. No audible murmurs rubs or 
gallops. No evidence of jugular venous distension
Pulm: Breath sounds clear and audible bilaterally
Abdominal: Soft, non-tender, non-distended abdomen with normal bowel sounds
Peripheral: No evidence of peripheral edema on palpation. Extremities warm to 
touch.
Summary:
62 yo male with PMH of DMT2 / HTN / rheumatic fever complicated by MVR / 
HFrEF presenting with new onset fatigue and palpitations for one week.. Given 
known cardiac disease and reported EKG finding of atrial flutter, the presentation 
is most likely due to cardiac etiology, raising concern for new, structural 
abnormality and possible worsening of underlying cardiac function. Pulmonary 
disease, infection and anemia are considered less likely, but remain on the
differential. 
Assessment and Plan:
1. New onset fatigue / palpitations. The patient presents to us from his PCP 
with tachycardia and atrial flutter, initially managed with a diltiazem drip 
for rate control. Inpatient workup should include EKG to investigate 
diagnosis of atrial flutter or other possible SVT that may have caused the 
patient’s fatigue and palpitations. Echocardiogram may be considered to 
assess for cardiac function, especially given underlying valvular disease 
and known CHF. Should consider switching to a beta blocker for rate 
control; though both beta blockers and non-DHP CCBs (such as diltiazem) 
will have to be used with caution since they could further exacerbate the 
patient’s HFrEF. The patient has a CHAD-VASC score of 3 and should also 
be started on an anticoagulant, such as heparin. Will need to consider an 
oral medication alternative for long-term management as an 
outpatient. While some type of SVT (ie aflutter, afib, etc) is most likely, 
other diagnoses must also be considered. Given his DM status and 
possibility of atypical MI presentation, cardiac enzymes and CXR should be 
ordered. While infection seems unlikely (lack of travel history, afebrile, 
lack of constitutional symptoms) a CBC should be obtained to look at his 
WBC to assess for underlying infection, given the possibility of 
myocarditis. Anemia, again unlikely given his presentation, can also cause 
shortness of breath, and could be of many etiologies. A CBC would tell us 
his Hb and Hct. SOB can also be of pulmonary origin. This seems less likely
given his lack of pulmonary history and his clear lungs on PE, as well as 
known CHF. The CXR, while not specific for most pulmonary disease, 
should be sensitive to and show evidence of the most common diseases of 
pulmonary origin (e.g. flattened diaphragm and enlarged lungs for COPD).
2. Long-standing mitral disease and HFrEF. Mitral disease can result in 
cardiac changes such as atrial distention (and afib). Therefore patient 
should get a cardiac echo to investigate mitral valve stenosis or 
regurgitation and atrial chamber size. He may also need to be diuresed
with lasix or other similar agent.
3. HTN. Well-controlled on current oral medications. 
4. DMT2 with an elevated HgbA1C (8). Diabetic diet, titrate long-acting 
insulin and Insulin sliding scale with meals, q6 glucose checks. 