
Attachments: Approach 2020 to the Patient with Lymphadenopathy.ppt (3078K)
Good morning (for 16 more minutes!), Ryan,
Your fourth H&P shows further growth, which is excellent. I have, as usual, several comments, many of them laudatory
and some intended to foster further growth:
1. It is excellent that you identify the informant(s) and their reliability right up front. This enables the reader to use the
appropriate degree of skepticism when reviewing the information.
2. It is excellent that you have given the duration of the chief complaint right up front. This has a major impact on the
differential diagnosis that is generated by the chief complaint.
3. The overall narrative of the HPI that you wrote is extremely well done, nicely chronological and appropriately
quantitative in the right places. The one thing you may have wanted to do, at the beginning, is to state the patient's state
of health prior to the onset of the items and events in the HPI. You did give this information in the past medical history, but
it is usually better to do this at the beginning of the HPI so that, from the beginning, the reader can know the "substrate" on
which the evolving problems fall.
4. I am repeating my compliment on your quantitative approach, pointing out that you indicate the change in his waist
size and the extent of his exercise intolerance.
5. It would have been more complete to indicate what specimen was sent for the Chlamydia culture. Was there a
urethral discharge?
6. It is excellent that you included absence of a family history of lymphoma. (As an alternative this could have been near
the end of the HPI, but it is fine to have put it in the family history.)
7. Let me commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in describing the patient's reporting of
symptoms.
8. It is excellent that you give the heart rhythm right up front in the vital signs with the heart rate.
9. Given what is in the HPI, it would have been appropriate to mention whether his weight loss was apparent in his
general appearance. (My generation used the word "wasted" for this; but your generation has taken this word away from
this usage!)
10. I am delighted that you percussed the chest. Please be aware that the normal finding is "resonant" and not
"resonate".
11. You use of "tympanic" is a common error. The normal finding of percussion of the gas-filled bowels is "tympany" and
the adjective for this is "tympanitic". "Tympanic" is the adjective for the eardrum, which is also called the "tympanum".
Most attendings wouldn't point this out, but your misfortune is to have me assigned to you.
12. It is astonishing that, with so much lymphadenopathy, he does not have them in the inguinal area.
13. In your Assessment and Plan paragraph, I assume you meant "leukocytosis" and not "lymphocytosis".
14. Your suggestion that the patient should have an excisional node biopsy is very important, as the architecture of what
they find is very critical to making the right diagnosis. An aspiration would not suffice. I have a set of slides on lymph
nodes that I will attach to this email.
15. We often think of liver enzymes as liver function tests, but really they are tests of liver status. The functions of the liver
are four: synthesis (as with clotting factors and albumin); degradation (as with ammonia); excretion (as with bilirubin); and
storage (as with glycogen and iron). Transaminases and alkaline phosphatase indicate liver status, not liver function. This
may seem like a trivial point, but, really, it isn't.)
16. It appears most likely to me that the dysphagia is external impingement of mediastinal nodes on the esophagus.
Chest CT with barium swallow should be part of the evaluation.
17. Although he has not been sick for very long, I think his anemia can be attributed to "chronic disease"; but the
leukocytosis is not consistent with that. I would be aggressive in working up the anemia.
18. You mentioned in the email that there is EBM material in this, but you may have forgotten to attach it, as I did not see
anything consistent with this either in the write-up or the attachment.
 this write-up is extremely good and shows substantial continued growth. I am looking forward to the next two.
Also, I would like to spend some time with you --perhaps 30 - 45 minutes--after the Clinical Challenge session next
Wednesday to review the OSCE videos. Please inform your team that you will be with me for that interval after Samuel
Pan's session.
Keep up the good work!
