
This is a very good write-up on a very, very difficult patient. I will have some suggestions regarding the organization
and a few other details, but don't be daunted, because, especially considering the unique difficulties presented by
this patient, your work is very, very good.
Comments (what else, from me?):
1. EXCELLENT that you gave the reliability of the historian right up front.
2. EXCELLENT that you included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. In this instance, the history of the actual present illness goes back many years. What you did was you gave a detailed
history of the chief complaint but that was (as is often the case) only the most recent event in a much longer illness. After
reading your complete write-up, I concluded that the actual present illness is cirrhosis and portal hypertension possibly
complicated by some COPD and consequent right-sided congestive heart failure. Some people (including me) would have
begun with his status at the onset of the drinking and smoking and then whatever episodes, chronologically, related to
that. In their chronologic places I would then put the cardiac events that led to the placement of the stent. Then I would go
into the events that led to this hospitalization, including the inpatient admission(s) related to the underlying causes of this
current admission.
It astonishes me that he gained 100 pounds in two months and no one intervened much earlier. If he wasn't reporting
his weight to someone (e.g., in the VNA), then why bother weighing himself? If he was reporting his weight gain to
someone as it was occurring, then someone dropped the ball. One of the problems with oral medications in people with
ascites is that there is usually edema of the bowel wall -- especially when there is portal hypertension. For this reason
there is almost always severe malabsorption of oral medications in people with ascites, proportional to the severity of the
ascites. It is likely that he was absorbing little, if any, of his meds in the several weeks prior to this admission.
4. Try very hard to avoid using a day of the week as a point of reference in the history, as this makes it difficult for the
reader to reconstruct the chronology when the document is read. It is best to use the moment of admission as the point of
reference, so that the reader doesn't have to guess--or consult a calendar-- to know how long prior to admission "Monday"
is.
5. I commend you for recording the quantity of the weight gain. It is good to be as quantitative as possible in
the medical history.
6. Several of the items in the ROS are integral parts of the HP (general, cardiac, pulmonary at least). Also, it is
conventional to place the ROS as the last part of the history, after the family and social histories.
7. A slangy word like "peeing" shouldn't be used in a formal document like a medical record. "Urination" or "voiding"
would be more acceptable.
8. I commend you for giving the manifestations of his allergies.
9. I commend you for including the ages at which his parents died. It would be more complete to have given his
son's age.
10. With smoking and drinking histories, it is important to give the age at which these began and how much was
consumed per day. Also, if one or more have been stopped, give the age at which it/they were stopped. Then reader can
calculate pack-years and have an idea of the rhythm of consumption.
11. You mention atrial fibrillation yet the heart rhythm is regular and the EKG couldn't have shown atrial fibrillation: you
give a P-R interval, suggesting that there are P waves.
12. I commend you for looking for hepatojugular reflux and for spelling "reflux" correctly!
13. I was not able to interpret the last words of the respiratory part of the physical examination: "Pt was able to and there
were clear lung sounds on his R..."
14. You included gynecomastia in the abdominal exam. It is part of the chest or breast exam. But I am glad that you
noted it. He has at least two reasons for having gynecomastia.
15. Were you able to attempt to elicit shifting dullness?
16. One way to look for a liver with an abdomen like this is called ballottement. It involves bouncing the liver off your hand
and if it bounces back that gives you an idea of where it is. If it works then you can move your hands around until you
don't feel the bounce-back. But it is not an easy maneuver in a very obese patient.
17. Your summary statement is very good.
18. Your Assessment statements are very, very good! I would, however, comment on the difficulty in absorbing his
meds as part of the problem.
19. With a normal MCV (not MVC), I think that iron deficiency is very unlikely; but that is where a look at the RDW would
be helpful, in case he has a mixed deficiency, being, probably, unable to absorb folate or B12 in his diet.
3/23/2021 Re: H&P4
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
20. I commend you for wanting to look at INR and PT, as well as AFP. A repeat RUQ ultrasound or even CT might
be indicated, with specific attention to ruling out a primary hepatic malignancy.
21. I agree that the TSH should be checked, especially because of difficulties with oral drug absorption.
22. When you say weight gain "is more likely due to bloating" I think you may have actually meant "fluid retention". The
two are not interchangeable.
23. Your EBM is an interesting combination of the old and the new and very relevant.
this is a good rendition of a very difficult set of circumstances. It would be difficult even for an
experienced clinician to assemble this narrative, and you are to be commended for the good job you did. You
didn't omit any important information. It was just a matter of how to arrange it into the most effective narrative.
All of us can improve on that. (That is why I call myself a PGY-51!) I am very impressed with the professional
growth that you have shown in a very short time.
If possible I'd like to speak with you for a few minutes later today. I will send yo a text to try to set up a time.
Warm regards,
