
First of all, it is I who should thank YOU for the wonderful experience of teaching and, to a small extent, getting to know
you as a person. You have enriched my life!
Second, I apologize for getting back to you so late, but, as I mentioned earlier, we had a religious holiday that started
Sunday night and this was the earliest I could respond, as your write-up was sent after sundown on Sunday evening. It is
yet another outstanding write-up, one that shows enormous growth from a strong starting point. My comments (mostly
compliments):
1. I commend you for indicating the reliability of the informant.
2. I commend you for indicating the duration of the chief complaint.
3. I commend you for indicating, right up front, that the patient is from abroad. That often has an impact on the
differential diagnosis.
4. You spelled "pruritus" correctly!!!!! That puts you in a very small minority of your peers. Bravo!!!! AND you avoided
"admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse".
5. The one additional thing you might have included in the HPI is whether there was any noted change in the patient's
weight.
6. But the HPI is wonderfully, fluently written and I am delighted with it. From it, a differential diagnosis comes to mind
that you happened not to mention in your A/P but I will come to that later.
7. It would be more complete to indicate the ages in the family members mentioned in the family history, or state that the
informant did not know this information.
8. Children (or if there are no children) should be mentioned in the family history.
9. The smoking history should indicate how long she has been smoking.
10. I love that you don't repeat in the ROS what is already mentioned elsewhere in the document.
11. I am pleased that you included the rhythm with the heart rate. I am betting that the rate of 71, which is a prime
number, came off a monitor.
12. I sense that the bronze color of the jaundice indicates a greenish component. That has an impact on the differential
diagnosis. Orange jaundice is usually hepatocellular. lemon yellow usually is hemolytic, and green-toned jaundice is
usually obstructive.
13. In the skin exam, the absence of spider hemangiomas is a pertinent negative and should have been mentioned
specifically.
14. I like that you looked inside the mouth for jaundice.
15. I am thrilled that you percussed the chest!
16. I am delighted that you looked for a fluid waive. It would be more complete to include, also, a search for shifting
dullness.
17. I am delighted that you indicated that bowel sounds, in addition to being present, were normal.
18. I am delighted that you quantified the liver span. Did you happen to notice what the consistency of the liver was?
Was it soft, firm, hard...?
19. It is very significant that the alkaline phosphatase is out of proportion to the transaminases. These numbers are not
really liver function tests. The liver has four functions: (1) synthesis (e.g., albumin and INR); (2) degradation (ammonia);
(3) excretion (bilirubin, primarily, is what we measure for this function); and (4) storage (primarily glycogen and iron,
normally, and these might sometimes require a biopsy). The transaminases represent hepatocellular injury. The alkaline
phosphatase (and also gamma glutamyl transpeptidase) represent obstruction somewhere along the biliary tract. This,
plus the greenish tinge to the jaundice, suggests obstruction of some part(s) of the biliary tract. Sometimes this is from
edema and sometimes it is from diffuse infiltration, as with amyloidosis, and sometimes it is due to cirrhosis. As she is
from South America, another cause of infiltrative liver disease is tuberculosis. Also, unlikely in this specific patient, is
secondary syphilis, which can cause purely obstructive chemistries.
20. I think with the onset of symptoms in the sixth decade, Wilson's disease is extremely unlikely.
21. I personally feel very strongly that this patient should have a liver biopsy as one of the earlier steps in her diagnostic
evaluation. Was this brought up by your team?
22. While primary biliary cholangitis is possible, and can become symptomatic in the sixth decade, you have some
evidence against this.
23. Your EBM is very interesting and certainly relates to this patient.
5/18/2021 Re: Fourth and Final HandP

I wish I had had more contact with you in this distressingly short clerkship. Your future in medicine is very bright
indeed. It would please me if you would keep me apprised of your future professional growth and development.
With warmest regards, and with thanks for providing me with such a delightful experience teaching you,
Bruce Fisher, PGY-51
PS - I have attached a couple of slide sets: One on exam of the liver and spleen and one on extrahepatic manifestations
of liver disease.
BF
