
Although you did submit the H&P yesterday, it was only 10 minutes before midnight, and so I don't feel too guilty about not
getting back to you until now. As I expected, the write-up has many strengths. I will mention these, as well as make a few
constructive suggestions to add even more strength to your excellent work.
1. First, before I forget, I want to compliment you for not using "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in describing the
patient's reporting of symptoms.
2. I commend you for indicating the informant and the informant's reliability right up front. This excellent practice allows
the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism (which in this case is, essentially, none) to what is reported. We
always want to feel able to rely on the accuracy of what is reported.
3. It is excellent that you included the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself.
4. What you have given as the HPI (reported very well, with good detail but no really unnecessary information in the first
paragraph) is actually the most recent episode in an illness that really began with the initial pulmonary embolus and the
factors/events that led up to it. This pulmonary embolism is, now, the second instance of that event. In my world (and,
also, in the world of the editors of the New England Journal of Medicine, as illustrated in their feature "Case Records of the
Massachusetts General Hospital"), it is important to begin at the beginning of the actual present illness. Sometimes that
means starting with the earliest risk factor for what eventually happened. For example, if someone comes in with
hemoptysis and is a smoker, it is appropriate to begin with the smoking history and the patient's state of health prior to any
smoking. If it is a patient with a painful sickle cell crisis, it would be reasonable, in my opinion, to start with the very first
symptom of sickle cell disease, which, often, is painful swelling of the fingers ("dactylitis"). In the narrative of this patient, I
might begin as follows:
This is a 56 year-old female who was in apparent good health until XXXXX, 2021, when she had (give the
symptoms) and was found to have deep vein thrombosis (state where and how extensive) and pulmonary
embolism. She was initially anticoagulated and treated with abixaban. She continued to take apixaban and felt well, but
stopped taking it nine months prior to admission because (and give the reason, if known). She continued to feel
well until two hours prior to admission...(and then give the information that you so eloquently reported in the first
paragraph of the HPI).
It is important to make the HPI as chronological as possible (which is always done in the New England Journal of
Medicine).
The second paragraph of the HPI as you have recorded it is really part of the "Hospital Course" and not part of the HPI as
it was up to the time of admission. Most authorities would include in the HPI only events that occurred up to the moment of
admission. It is good to include this information where you did, but it would be more accurate to label it "Hospital Course".
It might have been useful to indicate, in the HPI, why she stopped taking the apixaban.
5. I commend you for not mentioning, in the ROS, what you have already mentioned in the HPI.
6. In the PMHx, the HTN belongs there, and, perhaps the OSA (although that may have been reasonable to add at the
end of the HPI); but the DVT and PE really are inseparable parts of the HPI. In my world, HPI and PMH are usually
mutually exclusive.
7. In a hospital admission note (which is, really, a comprehensive H&P), it is appropriate to include, in the Family History,
parents, siblings, and children, with ages and state of health. In this case, the absence of a familial thrombotic diathesis
would have been appropriate to incorporate into the HPI, together with any other risk factors for the patient's DVTs.
8. I personally like to describe the heart rhythm with the heart rate in the Vitals. And when the patient is tachypneic, it is
useful to describe if there is any respiratory distress. (Actually, most authorities prefer that the presence or absence of
respiratory distress always be mentioned in the general description. In your instance, you mentioned that she was "in no
painful distress". I'm not sure what that means. With tachypnea, you'd want to mention distress relating to the work of
breathing.
9. Please form the habit of percussing every chest. It only takes about 15 seconds. If she had a big pulmonary infarct
you might detect in with percussion.
10. Although "regular rate and rhythm" is a catch phrase in wide use, it is really the rhythm that is regular. The rate is
either normal, rapid, or slow. It is very important that your descriptions be as precise as possible.
11. It is excellent that you recorded the presence of distal pulses. It would be more complete to describe their amplitude,
at least in general terms (e.g., 2+ for normal, 4+ or "bounding" for very abnormally strongly felt pulses, such as you might
2/23/23, 6:17 PM Re: H&P2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
see with severe aortic insufficiency [water hammer pulses]). It is also important to mention whether the amplitude of the
pulses is symmetrical. Several lives have been saved when asymmetry of peripheral pulses is pursued.
12. Except for your not considering the beginning of this illness to be with the first pulmonary embolism, your A/P
discussion is outstanding. I am especially pleased that you expressed concern about a hypercoagulable state (which old
fogies like me sometimes call a thrombotic diathesis). And I am extremely pleased that you raised the spectre of an occult
malignancy that may have predisposed her to this problem. While it is true that her sedentary life and substantial obesity
may have contributed to it, as a dear colleague of mine used to say "a dog can have ticks and fleas at the same time." I
think it would be very reasonable to do a search for an underlying malignancy at this point.
13. Your EBM section is excellent and very relevant to the immediate management of this patient. Your analysis of the
paper reflects sound clinical insight and very good scholarship.
Emma, I hope that these comments don't come across as unduly critical. There are so many strengths in this write-up.
But, to me, it is very important in constructing the HPI to recognize where it actually begins and what are events in the
overall narrative. This will teach you to seek the earliest symptoms and signs of illnesses and, hopefully, prevent severe
consequences later on for the patient(s). I perceive in your work, thus far, real clinical acumen and excellent ability to
express your thoughts and report your observations. What I am suggesting, really, is just to add a little polish that will give
your work even more luster, enabling you to enlighten your colleagues and, I hope one day, your students.
I look forward to your third H&P with eager anticipation.
Respectfully,
