
Subject: Re: My role as your H&P advisor
Date: Sun, Aug 7, 2022 11:03 am
Attachments: Admit Claim Deny paper.pdf (1233K), Don't Say Endorse Article.pdf (206K),
Liver Ascites Spleen Exam 2020 update.pptx (1739K), Neck Veins and Wave Forms 2022 update.ppt (1275K)
Good morning, Krystle,
Having read your H&P very carefully, I have several affirming comments and a few suggestions for improvement. There
are, indeed, many strengths which I wish to see continue. The comments are as follows:
1. It is very important to state at the outset who the informant is and the reliability of the informant. If the informant's
reliability is less than "good" this enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is reported and,
at times, to take measures to improve the reliability of what is reported.
2. It is extremely important to state the duration of the chief complaint. This can have a very strong impact on the
differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
3. The overall organization of the HPI is very good; but it is really the history of the chief complaint and not the history of
the present illness (a very common error for those early in their careers). It is very likely, as you concluded in the
Assessment section, that the present illness is COPD. For this reason, the HPI should begin with the earliest
manifestations of COPD in this patient (or, in her case, the beginning of risk factors [i.e., smoking]) and what her state of
health was at the very onset of all of this. One way to do this is:
The patient was in apparent good health until 40 years prior to admission, when she began to smoke cigarettes, one
pack per day, until three months prior to admission. She developed (then give the COPD symptoms, such as cough,
shortness of breath...) and has been hospitalized X times for what has been diagnosed as exacerbations of COPD....
It adds a little bit of volume to the HPI but enables you to omit things that you have put into PH and ROS (where you'd only
need to say "see HPI"). There are times when composing the HPI in this manner will enable you to make diagnoses that
might otherwise be missed. This is the way the HPI is composed in the New England Journal of Medicine's regular feature
"Case Records of the Massachusetts General Hospital" (the only deficit of which is that they don't usually include the
duration of the chief complaint--but don't let that dissuade you from doing this!)
4. For this reason, it is not accurate to say, in the beginning of the HPI, that she has a "past" history of COPD. If
anything, you can say she has a "history of COPD".
This may seem to be nit-picking, but it will make you a much stronger clinician if you adopt these suggestions.
5. In the fourth line of the first paragraph, I think you meant "walking" and not "waking". That is a little nit-picky, but when
we meet in person I can tell you why that is important.
6. Please do not use "endorse" "admit" "deny" or "claim" in describing the patient's reporting of symptoms. I have sent
your group articles about this and will attach these to this email for your review. We don't accuse patients of symptoms
that they should have to "deny" them and "endorse" has specific definitions which do not allow us to use this word to
indicate reporting of a symptom.
7. While the urinary symptoms are current, they really are not part of the HPI and can be included in the ROS. (I note
that the urine pH was not reported in the lab data. If the patient as an acid pH and this much pyuria, one thing that must
be considered, however unlikely, is tuberculosis of the urinary tract. Acid pyuria can be a hallmark of this disease.)
8. But I must emphasize that your organization of the HPI, as a history of the current chief complaint, is really excellent:
thorough, well written, quite chronological (which is very important in the HPI), articulate, and fluent.
9. Except for the repetitive use of "denies" the ROS is excellently composed. In my day, it was the last part of the history,
placed after everything else, such as PMH, PSH< Meds, Allergies, FH, and SH. But this is a small thing. We were trained
to do it that way because one of the roles of the ROS is as a "catch-all" for things that might not yet have been mentioned>
10. In listing allergies, it is very important to include the manifestation of the allergy. Among the reasons for this are the
need to distinguish between allergy and intolerance and to enable the physician to determine the seriousness of the
allergy, so that one can decide if is safe to use a congener of the drug in question. For example, anaphylaxis to penicillin
might make me reluctant to use a different beta-lactam in that patient, but mild rash would not.
11. It is EXCELLENT that you included the ages of the parents in the FH. Rather than not include the other family
members, it is more complete to include them with their ages and state of health, even if in good health. This includes
siblings and, if applicable, children, at the very least. And if there is an illness that is very prevalent in a family, it is
appropriate to include this. When I see you, please remind me to tell you my thalassemia story from when I was in private
practice over 40 years ago.
12. Your reporting of the physical examination is. overall, EXCELLENT. I have a couple of suggestions:
a. Include the rhythm with the heart rate in the vitals. This is a convention that I feel is very useful.
8/7/22, 11:06 AM Re: My role as your H&P advisor
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/5
b. In this case, the presence or absence of pulsus paradoxus would have been very useful to state explicitly.
c. In this patient, recording her weight as a vital sign would have been more complete.
13. Given her hemoglobin, it is hard for me to understand how she did not have conjunctival pallor.
14. The neck veins are important in every physical exam. (Slide set attached). Given her constellation of symptoms, the
presence or absence of Kussmaul's sign and/or hepatojugular reflux would matter.
15. Please be aware that it is the rhythm that is regular or irregular, not the rate. The rate is either normal, rapid, or slow.
16. But I COMMEND YOU for describing the pattern of irregularity (or lack of pattern, in this case) in the rhythm.
17. With atrial fibrillation, in addition to the irregularly irregular rhythm, there is usually a difference in the rate between
what we hear at the heart and feel at a peripheral artery. This difference is called a "pulse deficit" and the combination of a
pulse deficit of at least 10 and an irregularly irregular rhythm is pathognomonic of atrial fibrillation. It is believed that
thousands of stokes would be prevented each year if doctors used this observation in the physical exam.
18. It is always a good idea to give the actual span of the liver. I have attached a slide set about this part of the exam.
19. It is EXCELLENT that you did a peripheral sensory exam. (Ideally this should be done with a little wisp of cotton or
tissue paper, as it is unusual to be able to touch someone with our fingers lightly enough to do this exam properly.)
20. In describing edema in a lower extremity, it is more complete to state how high up on the leg it is detected (e.g.,
malleoli, mid-shin, mid-thigh...)
21. This is a patient in whose peripheral blood smear it would be useful to note basophilic stippling, as an indication of a
reticulocyte response to her anemia. It is possible that the elevated RDW reflects reticulocytosis. I am very delighted that
you included these red cell indices in your write-up.
22. I am sure that you are aware that the calcium cannot be interpreted without a simultaneous albumin level.
23. in the summary (which is EXCELLENTLY written), you contradict yourself in saying that she has an oxygen saturation
of 92% on 3L in the summary but 100% in the vitals. It is very important not to have internal contradictions in the
document, for medico-legal reasons.
24. In the first paragraph of the Assessment section you speak of the antibiotics as prophylactic. To me, given her green
sputum, she has an active bronchitis and for this reason the antibiotics are therapeutic and not really prophylactic.
25. Near the end of this section you use a lot of abbreviations. Try to write them out the first time so that there is no lack
of clarity in the statements.
26. I COMMEND YOU for including a post-void residual urinary volume an the evaluation of this patient. I suspect she will
ultimately have a CT of her abdomen and pelvis to assess her urinary anatomy and function.
27. Given that she is on an anticoagulant, it seems to me that stool testing for occult blood would be appropriate as part of
the anemia work-up. If present, the GI bleeding may not have been going on long enough to affect the iron chemistries
(which, of course, should still be done). Given the neuropathy, it would not be a bad idea to measure vitamin B12 levels
also.
28. Taking everything into consideration, it seems to me that a search for pulmonary embolism would be reasonable. Her
constellation of symptoms is not inconsistent with this and there are patients, even on Eliquis, who have pulmonary emboli.
I know that this is a lot to digest but I want to emphasize that this write-up has many great strengths, and I don't
want you to be discouraged by the volume of my suggestions. Based on this write-up I feel that you have a very bright
future as a clinician and I look forward to your next several H&P's. I understand the circumstances that caused you to turn
this one in so late in the week and sincerely hope that your next several can be sent to me by Wednesday
afternoon/evening of each week, so that I can get them back to you before the weekend. My usual practice is to try to get
them back to you within 24 hours of my receiving them, but to do that I have to have them no later than Thursday morning
but, ideally, by Wednesday late afternoon/evening.
I look forward to meeting you in person at tomorrow's Clinical Challenge session in 108A.
