
There was noting simple about this patient. This patient is so very complex that just your having taken on the task of
working him up merits praise. Although I will have a lot of comments, I think that your "performance" as reflected in
this write-up is extremely good. Here are my specific comments:
1. It is good that you list all of the informants and their reliability. It would be ideal to give the reason that the
patient himself is unreliable. You indicate it in your HPI but it would be best to give that information right up front.
2. You again give the duration of the chief complaint right up front, with the chief complaint itself, which is
excellent.
3. With a patient like this, who has so many simultaneous problems, some very relevant to the chief complaint and some
less so, some people (including me) would introduce him by saying something such as, "This is an 81 year-old male with
multiple medical problems, who was in a stable state of health until approximately two years prior to admission, when he
developed XXX symptoms leading to the diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma..." That is because his current problems really
began with the management of the bladder cancer and consequences thereof, probably complicated by the presence of
bladder diverticula (which never fully empty with voiding). In essence, your HPI can begin with the information that you
have in the second paragraph, limiting it only to the matters relating directly or indirectly to the urinary tract itself. This is a
VERY DIFFICULT task, and, because you didn't leave out an important details, I have to say that you did it well.
Organizing a mass of clinical information such as what you encountered with this patient is an extremely tough
job, and, be assured, you will achieve greater and greater mastery of it with every time you see a patient a
complex as this one. Considering your relative newness to all of this, I think you did it really well.
4. In reporting the weight loss, try to quantify it, as well as the time interval over which it occurred. If he can't tell it to you
in pounds, see if he can tell you if his waist size has changed. And, sometimes, a patient can't do that either.
5. As a generality, "peeing" is not a word that should be used in a formal document. it's a little slangy. Try "voiding" or
"urinating" instead.
6. If you feel that his non-urinary-tract problems that are active are very important to the HPI, you can add a few
sentences about each in smaller paragraphs after you describe the main problem.
7. In your last paragraph in the HPI, it isn't clear to me whether he stayed in the ER overnight before he was admitted or
was sent home and then came back.
8. In the PMH, because he had had a hemicolectomy, it is not possible to describe the colonoscopy as normal More
accurately you should say that there was no residual malignancy.
9. In the PMH, the information about the bladder cancer is really HPI. PMH and HPI are mutually exclusive.
10. I commend you for using the correct plural of "diverticulum"!
11. In the PSH, is it possible that the splenectomy was related to the ITP?
12. In the Family History, it is good to give the age of death of relatives whom you report to be dead, and to include
siblings and children with ages and state of health, in the FH.
13. In the SH, the way you describe the smoking history is perfect.
14. In the ROS, the items you under General really are part of the HPI.
15. You gave the rhythm right up front with the heart rate in the physical! YAY!!!
16. When you hear crackles in the lungs, ask the patient to cough. Sometimes, especially with atelectasis, the crackles
clear post-tussively. (It is noteworthy that the chest film didn't indicate anything that would give crackles.)
17. In noting the edema, indicate how high up the leg it is able to be elicited (e.g., ankle, mid-shin...)
18. With the neuro, did you do sensation or deep tendon reflexes?
19. In your discussion, first let me commend you on including literature that you have reviewed very
thoughtfully. Yet again you show yourself to be the "E" in the RIME scheme. I had thought, however, that
hypokalemia is seen in adrenal excess and that hypoadrenalism is associated with hyperkalemia. In managing a
hypoadrenal state, it is very easy to neglect to include mineralocorticoids specifically. It would be good to mention that
aspect of treatment. And when there is hypotension, you may not have the luxury of diagnostic testing first; you may have
to give replacement therapy and then do the testing when the patient stabilizes.
20. In your comment about the anemia, I would not assume it is dilution. It should be worked up for a cause. He has
multiple malignancies.
21. The blood sugar was only 93. I wouldn't be too aggressive with insulin.
Although this looks like a lot of constructive "criticism" please don't look at it as criticism. This was a very difficult patient,
even for an attending physician with considerable experience, so the fact that you took him on and wrote him up as
well as you did reflects both skill and achievement that place you very high among the students that I have taught
over the last five decades. You are a superstar in the making, Vaishnaviji, and I feel lucky to have had the
opportunity to interact with you as I have.


