
I have carefully read your write-up, which has many strengths. My comments, both laudatory and constructive, are
below:
1. I commend you for indicating the informant and her reliability right up front.
2. Although you later do indicate the duration of the chief complaint, it is conventional to state it right up front with the
chief complaint itself. This matters because the duration of the chief complaint can have an impact on what is actually in
the differential diagnosis.
3. Just because I am a nit-picker, the stuff we vomit is called "vomitus".
4. Instead of giving past history in the first sentence of the HPI (as many, many people do), this information does not
really affect the differential diagnosis and is more appropriate in the Past History.
5. It is valuable and conventional to begin the HPI with a statement of the patient's health status at the onset of the first
symptom (or risk behavior) of the HPI. For example, you could say "The patient is a 23 year-old female who was in her
usual state of apparent good health when..." Or, if you feel strongly about mentioning her other problems, you can say
something like "...who, except for atopic dermatitis and migraine, was in her usual state of apparent good health..." I like to
use the word "apparent" because it makes the statement more unassailable, since you are recording her perception of her
health.
6. Although your use of days of the week and dates do help the reader to reconstruct the chronology reasonably well, I
suggest you try using the moment of admission as the point of reference for all of the events in the HPI: 5 days prior to
admission...and so on. That way, no matter when the document is read, the reader can easily reconstruct the actual
chronology of the illness. Illnesses evolve over time, and using as precise a chronology as possible makes arriving at a
diagnosis much easier.
7. But I must commend you for adhering to the actual chronology very well in your construction of the HPI.
8. (The word "transaminitis" has become quite popular, but old goats such as I am don't really like it. I'm not telling you
not to use it, but there are more universally acceptable phrases, such as "elevated transaminases".)
9. I commend you for avoiding the use of "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse".
10. In the Past Medical History, it would be more complete to indicate whether the atopic dermatitis and migraines are
active or controlled, and if controlled, how. Also, it would be more complete to indicate when these problems began (and
how the ovarian cysts were discovered and treated, if treated).
11. The information transmitted would be more clear if you separate Medications and Allergies into two distinct headings.
12. "Birth control" can be either mechanical or pharmacologic, and, especially with this patient's HPI, it would be very
valuable to indicate what she is using as specifically as possible.
13. In the Family History, it is conventional to state the age of each person listed, if known.
14. Elsewhere in the document you mention a brother but you did not include him in the Family History.
15. It would be more complete to indicate the site of the mother's aneurysm, if the patient knows this.
16. For the tattoos, better to say "PTA" (for prior to admission") than "ago" or "this past Friday".
17. I commend you for not repeating in the ROS things that are already mentioned. Especially with connective
tissue diseases, symptoms are so variable that by the time you finish the HPI you have already mentioned most of
what would ordinarily go into the ROS.
18. In the Vitals, it is conventional to state the rhythm right up front with the heart rate.
19. It would have been relevant in this patient to mention the presence or absence of conjunctival pallor and/or jaundice.
(I was surprised not to see a CBC in the lab date.)
20. If the lungs are clear to auscultation, I think it follows that there are no adventitious sounds; but you have a huge
cohort of colleagues that repeat this anyway. (I try to act as if ink is very expensive.)
21. Did you percuss the chest? You have the misfortune of having an H&P advisor who percusses nearly every chest he
examines. It only takes about 10 seconds.
22. Although many people use the phrase "regular rate and rhythm" what is "regular" is the rhythm. The rate is either
normal, rapid, or slow. I tell you this because I would like to enable you to avoid challenge to your precision of language
use. When we speak in real time, remind me to tell you why this matters.
23. In recording the abdominal exam, it would have been clearer to write out the word "negative" or "absent" in front of
Murphy's sign, instead of using the "minus" sign.
24. I'm not sure what you mean when you say the rash is "almost" erythematous. If it blanches with pressure it is
erythema. It can be mildly erythematous, and maybe that is what you meant.
25. Given the differential diagnosis for this patient, it would have been more complete to mention the presence or absence
of tenderness in the thigh muscles and shoulder girdle muscles.
26. Given the differential diagnosis for this patient, it would have been more complete to have done a sensory exam--at
least light touch (meaning with a wisp of paper or cotton, not your fingers).
4/1/2021 Re: H&P #1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
27. Also, with myopathy, it is very important to elicit deep tendon reflexes.
28. Was there a rash on the hands? In dermatomyositis there are a couple of very key findings, when they are present:
Sparing of the interdigital spaces, and raised lesions called Gottron's papules.
29. If this patient has dermatomyositis, it may be a herald of a malignancy, especially of the GI tract, but also many
others. Although the M3 clerkship may not be a good place to learn the breast exam, that is one of the associated
malignancies, as are lymphomas, ovarian, and others. Her history of ovarian cysts causes me concern about this. It is
good that the initial evaluation included CT of abdomen and pelvis.
30. Your discussions in Assessment & Plan are very thoughtful and inclusive. But I think that the patient's age
essentially rules out polymyalgia rheumatica.
31. I am delighted that you suggested muscle biopsy for this patient. EMG might be valuable also.
32. Given her obesity, it would be valuable, I believe, to weigh her and record a baseline BMI.
33. I am pleased with the literature search and will happily add the EBM check-off to the EPA.
this is an extremely difficult patient, especially as your first patient on the M3 clerkship, and overall you
handled the task excellently. I know that I have made a lot of comments; but these are as much stylistic as
substantive. This write-up reflects excellent skill on your part and I look forward to reviewing the next ones.
Please let me know if there is a time later today that we can speak in real time.
