
It pleases me greatly that you were able to get this H&P to me by early Thursday afternoon. That makes it a little easier for
me to get my reply to you in good time. Having reviewed the write-up, I perceive excellent growth and would like to point
out those strong areas as well as a few areas for improvement:
1. It is excellent that you started out with identifying the informant and the informant's reliability.
2. It is likewise excellent that you indicated the duration of the chief complaint.
3. The narrative that you composed for the HPI is quite good indeed, nicely chronological and containing essentially all
the needed information.
4. (This is stylistic and not necessarily substantial, but instead of saying "no significant PMHx" an alternative is to say
"who was in apparent good health until..." I say this because, to me, previous wellness is significant as past medical
history.)
5. I commend you, again, for avoiding my buzz words of "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in reporting symptoms.
6. When he reported drainage on the towels, it would be more complete to get the patient to tell you what the drainage
looked like: was it bloody, purulent, and what color it was as well as some estimate of the quantity per day if possible.
7. It is wonderful that you gave a quantitative estimate of the weight loss.
8. The way you indicated that all of the pertinent positive were already in the HPI and did not repeat them in the ROS is
commendable. I like it when you don't waste ink repeating things that are already in the write-up.
9. In the social history, given what he said, it would have been reasonable to ask about venereal infections and
particularly HIV (was he ever tested for these).
10. I am pleased that you described his respirations in addition to counting them.
11. Given what you reported in the labs (Hb 5.5) it would have been appropriate to comment on pallor. With a hemoglobin
that low I am certain that his palmar creases were pale, as were his conjunctivae and oral mucosal surfaces and nailbeds.
12. In the abdominal exam it is always good to report the liver span.
13. It is extraordinary that he walked around with exposed bone for so long.
14. It is very important that you assessed the cremasteric reflexes and anal sphincter tone, given his HPI information.
15. In your assessment, a biopsy of L3 or L4 or the disc space between them would have been appropriate.
16. You state that there is "no clear source of infection on exam" but the back ulcer with exposed bone and drainage is
pretty good evidence of this, I believe.
17. It would have been more complete to list the MCV and RDW, especially with such profound anemia.
18. You chose a good article for EBM, but maybe one focusing on vertebral osteomyelitis would have been useful also.
this write-up shows great improvement over the first two, which themselves showed a trend toward improvement.
Keep up the good work and do, please, keep getting the write-ups to me promptly.
