
After careful review of your second H&P, I am delighted to see excellent growth, even though your first H&P was itself
excellent! I have relatively few comments:
1. It is excellent that you listed the reliability of the informant.
2. It would be more complete to include the duration of the chief complaint together with the complaint itself.
3. One could argue that this patient has two simultaneous present illnesses, as the septal abscess and the renal disease
are both very active at presentation. You integrated the two quite adroitly, and even noted a potential unifying explanation.
That is excellent.
4. In the HPI you avoided "admit" "claim" and "deny"!
5. You avoided repeating things in other parts of the history that were already mentioned in the HPI. This is very good.
6. You included the mother's age, which is excellent.
7. It would have been more complete to mention siblings, including if there are none.
8. the absence of family history of immune disorders could have been appended to the HPI. It gives a more complete
picture that way.
0. It would be more complete, in the social history, to give the marital status, and also whether she lives with someone or
not.
10. You fell into the "denies" trap in the ROS.
11. It is excellent that you included the cardiac rhythm with the heart rate, and that you described her respirations, in
addition to recording their rate.
12. I was a little surprised that you didn't mention nasal discharge, whether present or absent.
13. YOU PERCUSSED THE CHEST!!!!!!!!!!!! Bravo!
14. It is always best to indicate the liver span if at all possible.
15. Your Assessment and Plan are very good. I would add concern that she may have osteomyelitis and/or chondritis of
her nasal septum, as these may be more difficult to treat. I don't really think you have to implicate Staphylococcus, but a
repeat, deeper culture might be useful.
16. It is excellent that you included granulomatosis with polyangiitis in your differential diagnosis. The most probable
diagnoses satisfy Occam's Razor.
17. I am delighted that you suggested a renal biopsy. In her instance, you really have to have tissue to diagnose and
stage the illness.
18. Although I personally would have investigated the literature to deal more with the renal/connective tissue issues, your
EBM regarding management of the abscess is perfectly applicable to this patient.
your written work is wonderfully concise and well-focused and yet quite thorough. That is a skill that many student
never acquire.
I look forward to your next H&P.
