
First, let me say again that I appreciate your diligence in getting this H&P to me early enough for me to get my comments
back to you with appropriate promptness.
Second, you will see that most of the comments that I will write are simply laudatory and intended to reinforce the good
practices that you have adopted for this activity. The comments are as follows:
1. I commend you for using the format that you have used to identify the informant and the reliability of the informant.
(Although, given his omission of why he was taking lung-oriented medicines in the past, his reliability may be only a B- and
not an A+.)
2. I commend you for indicating the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself.
3. You summarized his baseline state of health beautifully--succinctly and yet with enough detail to enable the reader to
understand the "substrate" upon which the current problem has landed.
4. You have summarized the smoking history in a way that tells the reader all that is necessary to understand its potential
impact on the rest of his health: when he started and for how long. The one detail you might have included for even more
completeness is the daily amount he had smoked while a smoker.
5. In the second paragraph of the HPI it would have been more complete to indicate specifically whether he had had
fever or had not checked his temperature. (You mentioned that he had "some chills and sweats".
6. Although the RSV test was done after his arrival at the hospital, your inclusion of it in the HPI is very appropriate and it
gives important insights as to what might be causing the current problem.
7. Your mention of the hypoxia noted in the ED belongs in the HPI, and exactly where you placed it.
8. You did mention in your later note the importance of the type of work he had done while employed. Two things that
must be included in histories that include respiratory embarrassment are smoking and details of employment. Nonoccupational environmental exposures are also relevant for the same reason. (I once had a serious adult asthmatic, the
onset of whose asthma was clearly temporally related to the acquisition of a pet cat. When the cat left the household and
the home was appropriately decontaminated from the cat dander, the asthma disappeared!)
9. Some of what you included in the ROS would be appropriate to place in the HPI.
10. Your inclusion of the inspired oxygen dosage in the vital signs is very appropriate. Otherwise it is not possible to
interpret the oxygen level.
11. I commend you for describing the rate as normal and the rhythm as regular. Many of your peers simply say "regular
rate and rhythm" and that is not appropriate. The way you wrote it augments your credibility as one who transmits
information.
12. It is excellent that you specifically describe his work of breathing. Many omit this but it is always relevant when the
chief complaint is respiratory.
13. YOU PERCUSSED THE CHEST!!!!! BRAVISSIMO!!!!!!!!
14. YOU MEASURED THE LIVER DIMENSIONS!!!!!!!!!!!! BRAVISSIMO!!!!!!!!!!!! One time you must try the scratch test,
just to have the thrill of noting how effective it is and how easy it is.
15. I am delighted that you looked for cervical nodes. I am sure you are aware of the possibility of lymphadenopathy in
other sites. I am attaching my slide set on the lymph node exam. I know it is long but there is a lot of important stuff in it.
16. Your summary and Assessment and Plan section are, as usual, outstanding. The summary is exactly that and lays
out the really important stuff. The Assessment and Plan section is very excellent although I might have included some sort
of isolation as part of his management because of the RSV and also the role of hypoxia in stressing his heart.
in barely 4-1/2 weeks you have made ENORMOUS PROGRESS and I am absolutely thrilled to have witnessed
it. I eagerly look forward to you next (and, sadly, last [for me]) H&P.
Have a wonderful Thanksgiving break.
Respectfully,
