
You had raised my expectations with your excellent first write-up, and this second one makes me feel that those
high expectations were absolutely justified! This one is also superb! As usual, I do have some comments, none
negative and all either raves or suggestions for polish:
1. Your listing of the various informants and their reliability is excellent.
2. Please include the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the complaint itself.
3. (As an aside: It astonishes me that a chiropractor would prescribe a steroid for anything, rather than refer the patient
to an osteopath or an allopath. In general, pharmacologic interventions are not consistent with the fundamental philosophy
of chiropractic. I was not aware that a chiropractor's license allows prescription of medications.)
4. What is the patient's job with the ophthalmology group that she is familiar with the manifestations of vitreous
hemorrhage?
5. In keeping with the practice of using the moment of admission as the point of reference for all events in the HPI, I ask
that you consider saying "prior to admission" instead of "ago" in the HPI or any other part of the history.
6. The overall construction of the HPI is truly excellent. You have enough detail and it is well-focused. With so
many informants, this is no small feat!
7. In PSH, if you know whether the removed ovarian cyst was benign, that would be good to state explicitly.
8. The reaction that the patient has to Carisoprodol is not really an allergy but, rather, intolerance. Maybe you could use
the heading "Allergies/Intolerances" instead.
9. In the FH, even if the parents are well, it is a good practice to give their ages. Most people know the age of their
parents.
10. To me, it is conventional to include children in the FH, with age and state of health.
11. It would be helpful to know what her actual job is in the ophthalmology practice. It helps in interpreting the HPI.
12. It is more informative to give the actual smoking history instead of just the total number of pack-years. Was it one pack
per day for 8.5 years, starting at XX years of age, or 1/2 pack per day for 17 years?
13. Let me commend you for giving the rhythm right up front with the heart rate in listing the vital signs!
14. This is a little nit-picking, but "mucus" is the noun; the adjective is "mucous" and so you'd have to say "mucous
membrane" and not "mucus membrane".
15. Either in the history or the physical it would be more informative to state where she has the pain when she looks to the
right and upward.
16. Given her history, it is relevant at least to have listened to her carotid arteries for bruit and/or murmur.
17. Especially given the presence of dysmetria (which I commend you for eliciting!), it would have been ideal to elicit
the other cerebellar signs, such as heel-to-shin and gait and/or truncal ataxia.
18. To me it is striking to have so many red cells in cerebrospinal fluid and still have a normal protein.
19. Your summary is EXCELLENT. To write a succinct, well-focused summary is an art that I have seen very
seldom expressed so well by a beginning student.
20. Although I accept the diagnosis of RCVS (which is a new entity for me, honestly), I am concerned that there may be
more going on because of the extent of intracranial hemorrhage. Beware of the anchoring heuristic.
21. Your discussion of RCVS is so good! If it is from a published reference, it would be very good to give the
citation so that the reader can look up the document and learn from it also, and that would make you an
"educator" in the RIME assessment. This paragraph is so informative that I think it makes you an "educator"
anyway; but giving the reference would just affirm that even more.
22. Is there any possibility that her diarrhea could be related to her having gone camping not too long before its onset? It
is a little bit of a long interval, but it might have been useful to assess her stool.
23. I am pleased that you associated her metabolic acidosis with the diarrhea. As you evidently know, stool is
intrinsically alkaline, and large-volume diarrhea, with losses of bicarbonate, is associated of itself with metabolic acidosis.
24. You mention SCDs with regard to anticoagulation. I will ask you what SCDs are; but I'd be very hesitant to
anticoagulate a patient with intracranial hemorrhages.
You have again exceeded my expectations, which were already made quite high by your first write-up. You have
set the bar quite high for yourself And you have educated me regarding a clinical entity that I had not
previously known about. WOW!
I will try to phone you before 1:30 if possible; if not then after 5:00, as you suggested in your other email.
