
I have reviewed your third H&P and am happy to say that it shows very nice growth compared with the first two. (Also, I
am pleased that you submitted it so soon after handing in the last two. This makes my job a little easier.) My comments
are as follows:
1. This time I want to start by commending you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse".
2. I commend you for including the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the CC itself.
3. I commend you for indicating the informants and their reliability.
4. The HPI is very well constructed, with good attention to chronology and appropriate inclusion of detail.
5. I am a little confused about the timing of the stenting with the 2015 myocardial infarction. Your use of "s/p" in that
context makes it unclear. Usually, stenting is done AFTER the myocardial event. As it is conventionally used, "s/p" means
"status post" and indicates that the patient had an event or procedure in the past. It appears that you used it in this
instance to mean "followed by" and this is not how this jargon is used. Clarity is critically important in clinical
documentation.
6. Your inclusion of tingling as a pertinent negative is excellent!
7. Much of what you have in PMH and PSH is already mentioned in the HPI and need not be repeated. In this setting it
is OK to say "see HPI".
8. When you report an allergy, it is very important to include how the allergy is manifested. This is important to allow the
reader to distinguish between allergy and intolerance, and also, especially with drugs, to assess the relative hazard of
using a congener of the drug based on the seriousness of the allergic reaction. For example, if someone vomits with
ampicillin, it would still be safe to use another member of the penicillin family. If someone has bronchospasm or
anaphylaxis with ampicillin, then it would be unacceptably dangerous to use another member of that family for that patient.
9. Children are properly included in the family history, not the social history.
10. You appropriately referred to the HPI for those things in the ROS that are mentioned in the HPI. Bravo!
11. Although in your world FND is common parlance, it may not be on the "approved" list of abbreviations for the hospital.
Please be careful with abbreviations.
12. I commend you for using "reflux" and not "reflex" with the word "hepatojugular".
13. Although you do describe the right upper extremity to some extent in the HPI, with a formal document like an inpatient
admission note, you should repeat the physical findings in detail in the physical examination. This is because, except for
fever and weakness, nothing can be both a symptom and a sign. Symptoms are what the patient reports and signs are
things that the examiner elicits or describes.
14. In this instance it would have been very useful to measure his the circumference of each forearm as a baseline. You
could use a point that is the same distance from the olecranon process or the distalmost part of the ulna. That way,
another examiner would know exactly where to measure it to compare the size from one point in time to another.
15. I commend you for explicitly stating that the hand is warm and well perfused.
16. Although your discussion in the Plan section is thoughtful, I can't agree with the conclusion. To me, the inciting event,
the trauma to the arm, most probably led to a subcutaneous or intramuscular (or even subperiosteal) hemorrhage which
progressed because of his therapeutic inhibition of platelet function. If this were my patient, among my earliest diagnostic
maneuvers would be imaging to see if there is a hematoma in the forearm. Sometimes ultrasound is enough, but
sometimes it may be necessary to get a three-dimensional image such as a CT scan or MRI. This would inform the people
caring for the patient about how likely a subsequent compartment syndrome would be. Based on the swelling that you
describe, and the good perfusion, it does not sound like arterial thrombosis; and with his antiplatelet therapy it seems
relatively unlikely that venous thrombosis is the culprit. Antiplatelet agents really work and people who take them -- even
baby aspirin -- can really bleed with trauma. Honestly, I don't think that a work-up for a coagulopathy would be very
fruitful. I will be the first to acknowledge my error if this reasoning is not correct; but, given the evolution of this patient's
course, I really think that a trauma-induced hemorrhage into the soft tissue is what started it.
17. If he had, in fact, had superficial venous thromboses while taking an antiplatelet agent, then there may, indeed, be an
underlying thrombotic diathesis. I infer from what you wrote that when that happened several years ago, such a diagnosis
was not looked for.
overall, this H&P shows excellent growth over your first two efforts. Given your relative lack of experience, your
discussion under the "Plan" is not out of the ordinary. And I may be completely misguided in my own interpretation of what
actually happened to this patient. I would certainly like to know how this patient's subsequent course evolved.
And I look forward to your next several H&Ps.
7/9/2021 Re: IM H&P #3
