
It is hard to believe that this is already your fifth H&P! Time flies when you're having fun! this fifth H&P shows very good
growth over your fourth one, which itself had shown very good growth from the earlier ones, which were likewise stronger
and stronger, built on a strong start! My comments are as follows:
1. I want to reinforce your good practice of clearly identifying the informant(s).
2. The same is true for your indicating, very clearly, the reliability of the informant(s).
3. And, as I have said before, you are to be commended for clearly stating the duration of the chief complaint. It makes a
substantial difference, often, in what goes into the initial differential diagnosis ("hypothesis").
4. Your construction of the narrative of the History of Present Illness is superb, very chronological and with enough detail
but not so much as to make it hard to follow. There is one very minor technical point: What the patient reported from her
pulse oximeter was the heart rate (which I know that you know). This particular observation, with the extreme range of the
heart rate on the pulse oximeter, was very, very important to include in the HPI, and I commend you for doing this. In
essence, you have made the diagnosis very clear from the history alone, which is an important goal in composing the
history, and one that can be met about 90% of the time.
5. Although many people mark time sequences with "ago" another approach, that makes the document more
unassailable, is to use the phrase "prior to admission" or "PTA". That allows the reader to reconstruct the time sequence
of events with no possibility of confusion regarding the order in which they occur or when the reader actually reviews the
document. This is a very minor, perhaps stylistic, point, but I wanted to make you aware of it. If you were writing up a
case report for publication, you could not say "ago".
6. Let me commend you, once again, for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in recording the informants'
reporting of symptoms.
7. Some of what you have included in the Past Medical History you have also included (rightly) in the HPI. There is no
need to repeat these and, actually, what is in the HPI and what is in the PMH are mutually exclusive.
8. I believe that the mother's history of atrial fibrillation would be very appropriate to include in the HPI.
9. I commend you for including a description of the heart rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs. It would be more
complete, given what the cause is, to state where this heart rate was obtained. (My suspicion is that it came off a monitor.)
10. I commend you for including the BMI with the vital signs.
11. I commend you for including, in the cardiovascular part of the physical, the pulse deficit. This would have been OK to
include with the vital signs; but the important thing is that you noted it. The diagnosis of atrial fibrillation can be made in
this case without an EKG.
12. (As a pain-in-the-neck attending point, it is not possible to have an S4 gallop with atrial fibrillation, as this requires
atrial contraction.)
13. I commend you for percussing the chest.
14. In the abdomen, given that she had had a classical cesarean section, I would have expected that there is a visible
surgical scar. All scars should be recorded on the physical examination. Sometimes they can have forensic importance,
and doing so also shows that you actually looked at the patient.
15. I would only call the glucose of 125 high if I knew how long before it was drawn she had last eaten.
16. I am delighted that thyroid studies were included in the initial labs.
17. Your Assessment and Plan are, as usual, extremely well composed and presented.
18. It surprised me that you did not include an EBM. There is very important literature on the management of atrial
fibrillation. For example, is it better just to control rate, or should one attempt to convert the rhythm back to sinus? I am
sure that you discussed this issue with your team.
you continue to exceed my expectations and I am very moved that you have incorporated my prior suggestions into
your subsequent work. My only disappointment is that I have only one more H&P to review from you and that these
regular contacts will have to come to an end. But that is what growth is all about. I have no doubt that you have a
wonderfully bright future as an astute and caring clinician. I am eager to see H&P 6!
Have a great weekend.
