
In fact, you beat the deadline by 17 minutes! And this H&P is clearly the best of the four you have submitted, and that is
saying something, considering how good the third one was. This is an extremely complex patient and your rendition of the
narrative is really excellent. I will point out its many strengths and will have a few constructive comments:
1. It is excellent that you indicated the reasons that the history from this patient may not be 100% reliable.
2. It is excellent that you gave the duration of the chief complaint.
3. Your narrative is very chronological, and with a history as multi-faceted and complicated as this one, that is the best
way to do it. Also, by doing it this way you will train yourself to seek and recognize the earliest manifestations of diseases.
4. It would be good if you could proofread your work a little more and not depend on spell-check. You wrote "cloth" twice
when you meant "clot". I tell you this not because I want to harass you, but, rather, because little things like this can
detract from the validity of the overall document and/or your credibility as the reporter.
5. One symptom you did not mention as absent when you were listing manifestations of cord compression is erectile
dysfunction. It may well have been awkward to ask about this specific symptom, but sometimes it may be very
enlightening and may alert you to the same sort of situation as bowel or urinary bladder outlet dysfunction.
6. It is very good that you did not repeat in the ROS or PMH or PSH what you had already stated in your very complete
HPI.
7. I commend you for stating the regularity of the rhythm together with the heart rate.
8. In this patient specifically it would have been more complete to mention the presence or absence of conjunctival pallor
(which must have been there, given his very low hemoglobin).
9. In people with hemoglobin less than about 7.5, if you press on either side of a palmar crease with your fingers, the
crease itself will be very pale, even white. When the hemoglobin is greater than this, with this maneuver, even though the
skin you are pressing on blanches, the palmar crease itself will be very pale, usually white. With darker skinned people,
you may have to go to a rather small palmar crease to see this, but it works. I learned this in 1970 and have not yet seen it
fail.
10. Your description of the heart murmur is very good.
11. This is a chest that should have been percussed (as should all chests).
12. In this patient in particular, it would have been important to measure the span of the liver and to percuss the left upper
quadrant. It the left upper quadrant is dull to percussion, it often indicates a large spleen, even if you can't palpate the
spleen tip. Given his blood dyscrasias, liver and spleen size may be very revealing.
13. Although I have a strong bias in favor of looking at the peripheral blood smear in nearly every patient, in this patient it
was especially important -- in particular since later in your (very good) discussion you mention schistocytes. At the very
least, the team should have ordered a manual WBC differential count and that would have caused the person doing the
count to comment on red cell morphology.
14. There were a couple of lab abnormalities that merited specific comment: The elevated alk phos probably was due to
the broken bones. The patient has a pretty substantial anion gap, probably due to his renal insufficiency. The INR is
elevated even though he has not recently taken warfarin.
15. One item that you didn't mention in the differential diagnosis, that I think is extremely important and even probable, is a
vasculitis, perhaps polyarteritis nodosa or granulomatosis with polyangiitis (once called Wegener's granulomatosis).
Consideration of these would have led to certain blood tests and maybe even a skin/muscle/nerve biopsy. I am led to
considering a vasculitis because of the multisystem involvement of the many abnormalities, both clinical and laboratory.
16. You mention the importance of "spinal tap" in evaluating this patient; but I think you may have meant "bone marrow
biopsy". A bleeding tendency is NOT a contraindication to bone marrow biopsy and, in fact, is often the (strong) indication
for doing one. Honestly, I don't see how this patient can be managed without a bone marrow biopsy.
17. One of the things to pursue diagnostically in this patient, perhaps with ultrasound or other imaging, is vascular
insufficiency. The recurrent/persistent lower extremity ulcers call for this loudly.
18. I have to mention, with praise, your avoidance of "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in the write-up. Bravo!
19. The EBM is interesting and very relevant to this patient, although I think his problems go far beyond HIT.
I have great difficulty attributing his problems to heparin, as they antedate his ever having gotten heparin. The renal artery
stenosis may be due to a separate entity; but, given the multisystem nature of his problems and the prominence of
vascular insufficiency among them, it is hard for me to avoid very strong concern about a form of vasculitis. I think that
rheumatology is an extremely important service to consult, as is hematology (for the clotting problems and the
anemia/thrombocytopenia).
You took a very, very complicated patient, Eli, and synthesized a very cogent and comprehensible narrative that enables
the reader to understand the evolution of this patient's problems and arrive at a meaningful differential diagnosis. That is
6/17/2021 Your fourth H&P

the most important skill a physician can have, regardless of the specialty (in my opinion); because all subsequent
management depends on an accurate diagnosis. Your third and fourth H&Ps are, I believe, true reflections of your real
abilities. Keep working to improve and grow. There should be no limit to what you can achieve.
