
I have reviewed your first H&P and have several comments (as I usually do). It has several strengths and some areas for
improvement, as is to be expected, especially this early in your third year. Here are my comments:
1. Although you do identify the informant and his reliability, and this is very important, you have inserted this information
into the first paragraph. The conventional approach is to state this information in the very first line of the write-up, as a
separate "bullet". For example:
Informant: Patient, who is reliable. If there is some reason the doubt the reliability of the informant, you can say what
that is. For example, it may be "he has received a sedative and is confused" or "there is a language barrier" or any
number of other things that may impair the reliability of the history given to you. It is important to do this so that the reader
can apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to the history.
2. It is excellent that you indicated the duration of the chief complaint right up front. That has significant impact on the
differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
3. This is, in essence, the history of the evolution of heart disease in this patient. For this reason, it would be appropriate
to begin with the very first thing in his history that affected his heart. My approach would be to start out something like this:
This is a 62 year-old male who was well (if that is the case) until age X when, while in his native Ghana, he
developed acute rheumatic fever. This was complicated by mitral valve involvement which led, in 2007, to mitral valve
replacement because of (XYZ symptoms). (You would then go into how his cardiac disease was managed over the years
and what his overall status was. In this case, it would be important to summarize changes in his exercise tolerance from
the last time it was "normal" and what "normal" is for him.)
4. It is excellent that you stated his current exercise tolerance quantitatively.
5. If he is known to have a reduced ejection fraction, it would be relevant to state what that is, if known, and the last time
it was measured. It gives a clearer picture of how sick he is at baseline.
6. You have repeatedly used "deny" and :"endorse" to describe the reporting of symptoms. I ask you, please, to avoid
these words. I sent your group slides that include alternatives that are more neutral and more accurate, as well as two
articles that discuss why these words should not be used in a medical history.
7. Medications and Allergies should be separate categories in the history. As for his stopping two of the antihypertensive
meds, it would have been informative to say why (was it the low blood pressure readings?) and more logical to insert this
information into the HPI.
8. It would be informative to give more details (in the HPI) about the mitral valve replacement. Was it mechanical or
biological, for example, and have there been subsequent echoes to demonstrate its integrity?:
9. It would be valuable to state why he had to have an AICD. Was it because of a very low ejection fraction? Or were
there life-threatening arrhythmias?
10. In the family history, it is more complete to list the individuals, with their ages, and to include children, if any.
11. In the social history, it is important in give the marital status and his home living situation.
12. In the ROS, for things that are already mentioned elsewhere, you need only say "see HPI" or "see PMH"
13. It is conventional, and very informative, to give the rhythm with the rate in the vital signs. In this case, you later state
that the rhythm is irregular but that is not enough. It is more complete and more informative to indicate the pattern of the
irregularity. For example, it can be "irregularly irregular" (in which case a single number for the rate may not be enough
because from interval to interval the rate will vary); or it could be "regularly irregular" in which case you have to give the
pattern, such as "trigeminal" or "quadrigeminal". Sometimes the rhythm is "regular with occasional premature beats" or
"...with frequent premature beats". Or it may simply be "regular".
14. Your overall physical exam is too brief. You make no mention of his skin, eyes, or lymph nodes, and there is more to
the neck (which you don't mention specifically as a region) than just jugular veins. In this patient, in particular, the thyroid
is a very important part of the exam, as thyrotoxicosis can be subtle and can be overlooked as a cause of exacerbation of
congestive heart failure, especially with an atrial tachyarrhythmia. It would have been relevant to mention the presence or
absence of hepatojugular reflux. It is good practice to percuss chests in every patient but especially those with heart
disease. What you list as "peripheral" is conventionally termed "extremities" and in addition to edema, you should look for
distal pulses, at least dorsalis pedis. You did not mention the neurologic exam at all, and in this patient it would have been
valuable, at least, to elicit deep tendon reflexes as a crude assessment of thyroid status. The same is true for tremor. In
addition, he is diabetic and he may have peripheral neuropathy of which he is not aware.
15. For an admission H&P to a hospital, it is conventional to list initial laboratory and imaging studies.
16. Your Summary and Assessment and Plan are very well done: thorough and thoughtful.
I do not feel that this write-up reflects your total constellation of strength and talent and, if at all possible, I would like
you to re-write and submit what I know will e a vastly improved document. If you do this, I will not fill out the EPA form for
this H&P until I see the revised version. My objective is to get you to build on your considerable strengths. I do NOT want
6/25/2021 Re: M3 IM Clerkship: H&P #1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
you to be discouraged by what may seem like heavy-handed criticism. If I didn't think you had the potential to excel, I
wouldn't take the time to make these suggestions. Please send me a revised version as soon as you are able to. If you
wish, we can discuss this email in real time later today, but I'd like it to be before 6:00.
