
I have reviewed your write-up. It does not surprise me that the write-up has many strengths. As you will see is usual for
me, I have several comments, but many are more related to style than substance:
1. I commend you for indicating the reliability of the informant right up front. That is very helpful in telling the reader how
much skepticism to use when reading the document.
2. Ideally you should have the duration of the chief complaint right next to the chief complaint itself.
3. I don't think that the diabetes history is needed in the introductory sentence of the History of Present Illness. The
smoking--yes--because it may increase the risk for the main problem, as you astutely allude to later in the document.
4. Ideally, you should use the moment of admission as the reference point for every event in the document (as opposed
to "Easter" or "ago". That way, regardless of when the document is read, the reader can reconstruct the precise
chronology of the history.
5. If you want to say something about why he saw his doctor the day he did, you need not give the details of the diabetes
symptoms. You can say, for example, "for an unrelated reason (see below) he saw his PCP, who noted..." I assume the
reason for admission was the blood sugar and diabetes-related symptoms. The point is, if the chief complaint is related to
the leg swelling, try not to distract the reader with other unrelated problems. The alternative approach is that you could
have two separate paragraphs in the HPI, one about the diabetes and its symptoms and one about the leg swelling. It is
not unreasonable to indicate that he has two parallel histories of present illness.
6. One of the things about me that I ask that you accept is my negative opinion about the use of the words "admit"
"claim" "deny" and "endorse" in medical histories. We don't accuse patients of having symptoms, that they should have to
"deny" having them. There are alternative, more neutral ways to express this. I will attach a slide set on the oral
presentation that has several slides about this issue. Well-refereed medical journals never use these words in case
presentations. As for "endorse" (which you did not use), using this word blurs the meaning of what is said. When
someone tells me that a patient "endorses" drug abuse, does that mean that the patient recommends it to others?
7. You need not repeat elsewhere what is already in the HPI. Just say, "see HPI" or "in addition to what is in the HPI..."
8. The absence of family history of coagulation disorders rightly belongs in the HPI.
9. There should be more in the Family History: Both parents, with their ages whether alive or dead, all siblings, and
children, also whether alive or dead, with ages. Also, there are a number of potentially inherited illnesses which should be
mentioned, whether present or absent. (To name a few, cancer, arthritis, blood disorders [e.g., thalassemia]) And there
are some non-inherited diseases that can run in a family, such as tuberculosis (which was once thought to be inherited
because it afflicted so many members of a household -- for example, the Bronte family of literary fame).
10. It would be more complete to include the marital status in the social history.
11. In the vitals, it is conventional to indicate the general description of the rhythm (e.g., regular) with the heart rate; and,
especially with this patient, it would be useful to indicate whether the respirations are "labored" or "unlabored" and their
depth (e.g., "shallow")
12. In HEENT, at least take a look at the throat in addition to the eyes.
13. I am a percussion enthusiast. In this case, especially, it would have been relevant.
14. In addition to describing the fact that the bowel sounds are present, it is conventional to indicate whether they are
normal. Also, especially in this patient, description of liver size and consistency would be very important.
15. It would be more complete to state how high up the leg the edema extends (e.g., to malleoli, to mid-shin, to midthigh...)
16. It would be ideal to give calf circumferences, measured the same distance from an immovable landmark, such as the
tibial tuberosity. If possible you should acquire a tape measure.
17. The absence of numbness, weakness, and paresthesias, as you report it, is really history and not physical exam. If
you are talking about a sensory modality, then you should state which (elgl, pain, light touch...).
18. It is very interesting that, with such extensive pulmonary emboli, the SaO2 was so good, especially in a smoker.
19. Your discussions in the Assessment and Plan are extremely good! I am especially pleased that you are taking
malignancy into consideration as a potential underlying cause of all the clotting. It is possible that some of his baseline
swelling is related to the likelihood that he stands for most of his working day. (Most athletic coaches in high school also
teach a class--or, at least, they did when I was in school. The systems didn't pay salaries solely for coaching.)
20. I don't think you can invoke renal disease as contributing to his edema, given his normal creatinine level. If you are
concerned about renal damage from diabetes, a urinalysis, concentrating especially on proteinuria, would be very helpful.
21. In managing his diabetes, do you think that diet should also have a role?
22. Your choice of an article for EBM was excellent. Very current and very applicable to this patient.
I know that this seems like a lot of criticism, but, really, it is not meant to demoralize you. Rather, your write-up
showed such strength, that what I am suggesting, mainly, is adding a little polish. You never handed work in to me before,
