
One more thing: I appreciate the work you did to find relevant literature, and how nicely you applied it to this patient.
BF
-----Original Message-----
From: fishbru <fishbru@aol.com>
To: ys778@rwjms.rutgers.edu <ys778@rwjms.rutgers.edu>
Sent: Thu, Jan 5, 2023 11:59 am
Subject: H&P 1
Hello, Yaerin,
First, I want to thank you for getting the H&P to me so promptly. It greatly facilitates my time management to have the
flexibility made possible by this. This write-up has many strengths, which I will mention to reinforce these good practices.
There are also some areas for growth and improvement, which I will also mention. The comments follow:
1. It is a good practice to begin the document with a clear statement of who the informant is and the reliability of the
informant. This enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is reported. This skepticism
leads to supporting conclusions with good evidence. You could format it as followsa;
Informant: Patient (or other informant, depending on the circumstances. Old records can also be included as
informants.)
Reliability: Good (or, if less than good, the things that reduce the reliability, such as recent sedatives, language
barriers, or poor memory, among many other things)
2. It is a convention to include the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint. The duration can
have a major impact on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
3. I commend you for beginning the history with when the diabetes began. It would be more complete to give the
patient's general health status at the onset of this (which is the present illness).
4. I commend you for indicating that his diabetes has been in good control.
5. I commend you for using the moment of admission as the point of reference for the onset of his acute problems. That
enables you to compose a narrative that is chronological, which is a very good practice.
6. I am absolutely delighted that you conscientiously avoided "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in describing his
reporting of symptoms. Bravissima!!!
7. Several items in the Review of Systems relate to the present illness and are already mentioned in it. You can just say
"See HPI. In addition..." (Pretend that ink is very expensive so you don't want to repeat anything.)
8. I commend you for the thoroughness of your Review of Systems.
9. Also, as the diabetes is the present illness, it really should not be listed as Past Medical History. The two are mutually
exclusive.
10. The Social History includes much very important information, for which I commend you. It would be more complete to
indicate what type of work he had had when (and if) he had been employed in the past and why he is not employed at
present.
11. Some people would include the family history of diabetes in the HPI, as the last sentence. (I am one of them.)
12. Given that you (excellently) included height and weight in the vital signs, it would have been cool to calculate the BMI
(which in this patient was 29.3).
13. Please be aware of the difference between "pain" and "tenderness". "Pain" is a symptom, meaning that it is reported
by the patient. The physical finding that reflects pain on being touched, as in a physical examination, is called
"tenderness". Thus it would have been more accurate to say he had no jaw tenderness, if you were reporting a physical
finding. An exception might be if he had pain on movement of the jaw, which then would also require reporting how much
jaw movement resulted in pain, which would be an observation on physical examinaitoin.
14. A visual field deficit can be roughly quantified by how many degrees past which he can't see the item. Also, for this
patient, whose most urgent differential diagnosis (and, in my opinion, most likely diagnosis) is retinal detachment, a
funduscopic examination is an extremely urgently needed part of the physical exam, as its management has immediate
implications. (For example, you would want him to lie with his head as flat as possible until it can be ruled in or out.)
1/5/23, 12:02 PM One more comment on H&P 1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
15. It would be more complete, especially given the high blood pressure, to estimate where the cardiac point of maximal
impulse is (in which intercostal space and how far to the left of the midsternal line).
16. I am ecstatic that you percussed the patient's chest!!!!
17. It would be more complete to give an estimate of the patient's liver span, especially since he has edema and high
blood pressure.
18. I am pleased that you reported the edema. It would be more complete to indicate how high up the leg it is present,
e.g., mid-shin, tibial tuberosity, or just at the malleoli.
19. It is striking that this patient is anemic. I am delighted that you included the MCV and RDW in the data.
20. Later on you mentioned the blood sugar of 166, but it is not in the compiled lab data that you recorded.
21. In this patient it might have been a good idea to include the hemoglobin A1C.
22. Your summary in the Assessment/Plan is very good. I personally would give the greatest emphasis to the possibility of
a detached retina, as that is remediable and can lead to permanent and sometimes crippling vision loss. As you know, if
he has diabetic retinopathy, the fragility of the neovascularized retinal vessels raises the likelihood of this diagnosis, which
is why I feel so strongly that a funduscopic was especially important in this patient (although it is important in all patients, to
me).
23. I am not sure what his blood sugar was on admission, but one of the causes of his metabolic acidosis could be
ketoacidosis. Therefore some measurement of urine and/or serum ketones should have been done.
24. Also, stool is alkaline. Large fluid losses from diarrhea is an important cause of metabolic acidosis.
25. I commend you for spelling "funduscopic" correctly!!!
26. It would have been more complete to add anemia to your Assessment/Plan. Could his anemia be related to
nephropathy from poorly controlled diabetes? (By the way, unless you used a very fine filament to test his peripheral
sensation, it is not possible to say with certainty that sensation is intact. Remind me to tell you of an instance where this
was missed by finger touching but then found with use of a fine filament.)
Yaerin, this is a very, very good H&P, just needing a little polish. Ihave attached some slide that I have put together on the
chest exam and the liver/spleen exam for your reference. I am eager to see the growth that will be present in your next
H&P!
