History and Physical Exam
Date: 10/03/2020
Referral Source: Transfer from Community Medical Center and Neurology Critical Care Unit at RWJMS
Data Source: Patient (unreliable/confused), Patient’s sister (reliable), Neurosurgery and Neurology 
Critical Care consult notes (reliable)
Chief Complaint: Recurrent headaches
History of Present Illness
Ms. A is a 37-year-old female with a PMH of HTN and chronic back pain who presents with a severe 
throbbing headache. She was apparently well until one week ago when she began experiencing a severe 
bilateral diffuse throbbing headache while sleeping at night. She rated the headache 10/10. She was 
concerned that it may be a migraine. She took Tylenol and it did not alleviate her pain, so she went to a
chiropractor the next day. She had never seen a chiropractor before this. The chiropractor prescribed 
Medrol Dosepack and it completely relieved her pain. It is uncertain how many days Ms. A took the 
steroids. Over the next two days, however, she began experiencing the headache for a second time and 
it gradually grew in intensity. Four days ago, the headache became unbearable and she described it as 
being 10x worse than the first. This prompted her to go to the ED at Community Medical Center. Both
headaches were associated with vomiting, dizziness, confusion, hypersensitivity to sound, and blurry 
vision which she describes as she describes as “a vitreous hemorrhage.” Review of systems is positive for 
fatigue, neck pain which worsens with movement, and back pain which began one month ago while 
camping. She also reports watery diarrhea which started one week ago with three episodes over the 
course of three days. She thinks that is not associated with meals, however, she has not experienced 
diarrhea since her admission when she reduced her food intake.
CT ordered at Community Medical Center showed a 2.8cm left frontal intraparenchymal hematoma, a 
3.8cm right parietal intraparenchymal hematoma, and a left sylvian fissure subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
She was then transferred to the Neurosurgery unit at RWJUH for higher level care with a systolic blood 
pressure of 145 where she was started on nicardipine and then weaned off. Yesterday, she received an 
MRV and MRA Brain w/o Contrast, a diagnostic cerebral angiogram, and a LP. As per neurosurgery, her
hemorrhages are stable on repeat imaging and no further surgical intervention is needed so she was 
admitted today to the medicine floor. Today, her headache is an 8/10 in severity, unaccompanied by any 
other symptoms, and not alleviated by Tylenol. 
Past Medical History
Hypertension
Gestational Diabetes 
Past Surgical History
Ovarian Cyst Removal
Medications
Metoprolol Succinate 50mg daily
Medrol Dose Pack
Mirena
Allergies
Carisoprodol – dizziness, sleeplessness
Family History
No medical history reported parents
Maternal Grandmother – Hypertension
Maternal Grandfather – Glaucoma
Does not know history of family members on the paternal side 
No autoimmune conditions in the family
Social History
Ms. A works in an ophthalmology clinic and lives at home with her husband and son. She quit smoking 8 
years ago, but prior to that, had an 8.5-pack-year history. Social alcohol use. Occasional marijuana use; 
smoked one joint of marijuana in the past week. 
Review of Systems
General: (+) fatigue, no traumas or falls, no fevers, no chills, no recent illnesses, no night sweats
HEENT: See HPI; no recurrent nose bleeds, no mouth ulcers
Cardio: no chest pain, no lower extremity edema
Pulm: no shortness of breath, no coughing
GI: see HPI; no stomach pain, no dysphagia
GU: no dysuria 
Derm: no rashes
Endo: no polyuria, no recurrent unexplained bleeding or bruising
Neuro: no loss of consciousness, no focal deficits 
MSK: See HPI; no joint pain, no trouble with ambulation
Physical Exam
Vitals: Temp 98.7°F (oral), HR: 60 and regular, BP 141/74, RR: 20, SpO2: 95% on room air, Weight: 102kg
General: A middle-aged woman lying in her bed. Initially, she looked tired and in distress, but began 
engaging with the team more and looked better as the encounter progressed.
HEENT: Normal conjunctiva and sclera, PERRLA, mucus membranes moist, pain on right lateral gaze and 
upward gaze, tongue midline, no dysarthria
Neck: not assessed
Cardiac: normal S1-S2, no rubs, murmurs, or gallops
Pulm: CTAB, no wheezes, rales, or rhonchi, good respiratory effort
Abdomen: Soft, nondistended, and nontender. No rebound tenderness or organomegaly. Normal bowel 
sounds
Pelvic: not assessed
Extremities: no clubbing, cyanosis, or edema
Neuro: AAOx3, CN 2-12 intact, sensation intact, 5/5 strength on all extremities, slight dysmetria on 
finger to nose testing with left hand
Psych: not assessed
Labs
LP: Glu 72, Protein 21, RBC 7068, WBC 5
Imaging
MRV Head w/o Contrast
Normal MRV of the Brain
MRA Head w/o Contrast
Bilateral stenoses of MCA branches possibly with beading suspected despite some motion. 
Diagnostic Cerebral Angiogram: 
Mild to moderate vasoconstriction with vasculitis like pattern in right P1-P2 junction of PCA, left 
P2-P3 segment, and moderate vasoconstriction of bilateral SCAs. Mild to moderate 
vasoconstriction in right MCA. 
The V2 cervical segment of right vertebral artery shows 30-40% stenosis due to possible 
atherosclerotic disease. 
5 mg Intra-arterial Verapamil into the right vertebral artery did not improve caliber of stenosis.
There is a 3mm pseudoaneurysm associated with the medial wall. 
Summary
Ms. A is a 37-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension and gestational diabetes,
presenting with headaches. The headaches are accompanied by vomiting, dizziness, confusion, 
hypersensitivity to sound, blurry vision, fatigue, and neck pain. Physical exam shows hypertension and 
pain on right lateral and upward gaze and slight dysmetria on the left side. Labs show increased WBC, 
increased hemoglobin, low bicarb, and high anion gap. CT taken prior to admission at RWJUH showed 
left frontal and right parietal intraparenchymal hematomas and a left sylvian fissure subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. On diagnostic cerebral angiogram, vasoconstriction of the anterior and posterior 
circulations in a vasculitis-like pattern was noticed with no relief of stenosis with 5mg intra-arterial 
verapamil. Most likely etiology is Reversible Cerebral Vasoconstriction Syndrome.
Plan
1. Headache: The presence of multiple thunderclap headaches recurring over a few days has 
nearly 100 percent sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of RCVS. Ms. A scores a 10 on the 
RCVS2 score (recurrent headaches present-5, no carotid artery narrowing-0, vasoconstrictive 
triggers-3, female sex-1, subarachnoid hemmorhage-1). In RCVS, the onset headaches are 
usually diffuse or located in the occipital region or vertex. They are often accompanied with 
nausea and photosensitivity. While most patients experience moderate pain relief within a few 
minutes to hours, it can be followed by sudden, severe exacerbations that can recur for days. It 
can have multiple triggering factors, such as medication or preexisting conditions, and can often 
be associated with hypertension. Visual deficits, including blurry vision is common and can be 
associated with concomitant posterior reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Key 
components of diagnosis, in terms of imaging, include the absence of aneurysmal subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, variable presence of vasogenic edema, FLAIR sulcal hyperintensities (dot sign) on 
MRI, symmetric border-zone infarcts, intraparenchymal hemorrhage, combined with multifocal 
segmental cerebral artery vasoconstriction on angiography. On the differential diagnosis is 
aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage which also presents with thunderclap headaches, 
subarachnoid blood, and cerebral artery narrowing, but the recurrent nature of thunderclap 
headaches related to RCVS, the superficial location and small quantity of subarachnoid blood, 
the widespread, symmetric vasoconstriction, and unremarkable LP distinguish RCVS from 
aneurysmal bleeds. RCVS can also be mistaken for Primary Angiitis of the Central Nervous 
System (PACNS). Patients with PACNS usually have an insidious progressive clinical course with 
chronic headaches, and rarely have thunderclap headache. The characteristic vasoconstriction 
of RCVS alternates between narrowing and dilation of the cerebral arteries; the narrowing on 
PACNS is much more irregular. Brain imaging in RCVS can be normal or show watershed infarcts 
or lobar hemorrhages, whereas PACNS is usually associated with accumulating T2-hyperintense 
brain lesions, leptomeningeal enhancement, and scattered deep infarcts. 
Plan: 
a. For pain, Tylenol, tizanidine, fiorocet, oxycodone. Triptans and the ergot derivatives are 
contraindicated because of their vasoconstrictive actions. Empiric glucocorticoid 
therapy should not be given if primary angiitis of the central nervous system (PACNS) 
cannot be ruled out. Steroids may also affect lab results. Referral to a neurologist and a
pain management specialist upon discharge. 
b. In treating vasoconstriction, evidence is lacking for the use of calcium channel blockers, 
magnesium sulfate, serotonin antagonists, or dantrolene. Balloon angioplasty and direct 
intra-arterial administration of nicardipine, papaverine, milrinone, and nimodipine have 
been used with variable success. 
c. No neurological intervention indicated at this time. Q4h neuro checks. DVT prophylaxis 
is on hold. 
2. Vasculitis 
a. Since Diagnostic Cerebral Angiogram suggested vasculitis, Rheum should be consulted 
and lupus, rheumatoid, vasculitis, antiphospholipid serologies, HIV, and hepatitis panel 
should be ordered. 
3. Hypertension
a. There is no consensus for the goals of hypertension for RCVS. High blood pressure 
(systolic >180 mmHg) can be treated with labetalol or nicardipine.
b. Neurosurgery has recommended to keep SBP<140 and give labetalol IV for SBP>180. 
Continue with Labetalol 200mg PO q8h. 
4. Leukocytosis
a. Possibly reactive to SAH. LP had 5 WBC and there was one instance where fever spiked 
to 100.6 yesterday. Low suspicion for infection. Get blood cultures. 
5. Diarrhea
a. Ms. A’s diarrhea seems acute in nature, staring one week ago, three episodes over the 
course of three days. She does not think that is not associated with meals and she has 
also not experienced diarrhea since she was admitted and reduced her food intake. 
6. Metabolic Acidosis with Anion Gap
a. Her high anion gap (18) and metabolic acidosis as evidenced by low bicarb (18.2) may 
also be due to dehydration and loss of electrolytes from these previous episodes of 
diarrhea. Plan is to encourage food and water intake, for dehydration, replete 
electrolytes as needed, and monitor for recurrence. Lactate levels should be ordered. 
b. She has a history of gestational diabetes. Headaches, nausea, vomiting, fatigues, 
confusion, and blurry vision may be present in diabetic ketoacidosis as well, these lab 
values could be due to mild, resolving DKA. Her glucose on presentation to ED was 170. 
Since then has been Insulin Lispro Humalog Sliding Scale, subcutaneous every 6 hours. 
Her last glucose level was 111. 
Fluids: None
Electrolytes: prn
Nutrition: regular
Anticoagulation: SCDs
DISPO: pending further workup