
M3 IM Clerkship
H&P #2
5 July 2021 
CC: “Fever and fatigue for 5 days”
Informant: Patient. He is reliable.
HPI:
This is a 61-year-old male with PMH of HTN and HLD who was well until 5 days ago 
when he noticed an increased sensation of fatigue while at the gym. Later that evening 
he spiked a fever, which he measured at home to be as high as 103F. He took Tylenol 
which he found improved his symptoms of fever / chills / fatigue / rigors and reduced the 
fever on home measurement to around 101F. He also reports two episodes of night 
sweats since his symptoms began. He states no sore throat or coryza and no 
palpitations / chest pain / syncope. He also reports no SOB / pleuritic pain / cough, but 
does say he feels tired more easily when exerting himself. He does not recall any 
nausea / vomiting / changes in bowel habits or blood in stool. He reports no travel in the 
last month or sick contacts and works in the office about 2-3 days per week as an 
energy consultant. He has been vaccinated against COVID19. His last colonoscopy was 
11 years ago and showed no abnormalities. His regular doctor is his cardiologist for his 
HTN and HLD. Two days ago he presented to an urgent care clinic, where they did 
some blood work and treated him empirically for a bacterial infection with a prescription 
for Azithromycin. He took one 500mg dose and then was subsequently told by the 
urgent care clinic to go to the emergency room when the results of his blood work
demonstrated transaminitis and a low WBC count. On presentation to the RWJUH ED 
our initial lab workup was suggestive of a possible parasitic infection. On further 
questioning he states he swims in the ocean on weekends and often walks barefoot on 
the beach. He does not recall any recent hikes in wooded areas. He does not have a 
dog, but his daughter has a dog which he describes as an “inside dog.” The last travel 
out of the country he recalls was going to Bermuda pre-COVID19 lockdown. 
PMH:
 HTN and HLD for 35 years
Medications:
 Valsartan 80mg qd
 HCTZ 12.5 mg qd
 Atorvastatin 20 mg PO qd
 Takes CoQ10 and fish oil supplements
 One dose 500mg Azithromycin PO as prescribed by urgent care since onset of 
symptoms
 OTC PO Tylenol 10 pills per day since onset of symptoms. Does not recall if 
normal (325mg) or extra strength (500mg).
Allergies:
 No known allergies to drugs, latex, or foods
PSH:
Submitted 2021 07 06 
 Reports no past surgeries
FH:
 Lives with wife at home. Feels safe. No pets. 
 Works as an energy consultant.
 Two adult children not living at home
 Dad had CRC in 60s and died in 90s of dementia
 Mom died in 70s of liver cancer with extensive prior EtOH history, also history of 
HTN and RA
SH:
 Has felt stressed with retirement approaching and also daughter been in custody 
battle with ex husband
 Exercises regularly in gym 3-4x each week
 Never any tobacco use
 3-4 beers on weekend, social alcohol use
 Smoked marijuana in HS but not in last 30 years
ROS:
 General: See HPI 
 Neuro: Patient states no dizziness / numbness / tingling
 HEENT: Patient states new vision changes in which vertical lines look blurry 
occasionally but no loss of vision / no ocular pain / no coryza / no sinus pressure 
/ no sore throat / no change in hearing but has had tinnitus for long time
 CV: See HPI
 Lungs: See HPI
 GI: See HPI 
 GU: Patient states no changes in urinary habits / occasionally wakes at night to 
urinate / no pain or blood on urination / no flank pain
 MSK: Patient states no new muscle or joint pain / reports some old sports injuries 
to right shoulder and left knee
 Heme: Patients states no new bruises or nose bleeds
 Derm: Patient states no new rashes or changes in skin color
 Psych: Patient states the last year has been filled with a lot of anxiety for him as 
he nears retirement and as his daughter has been in a custody battle over 
grandchild with her ex-husband
Vitals: BP140/90, HR103 and regular rhythm, RR17, T99.5F (Tmax in hospital 101.5F), 
SpO2 98% on room air
PE:
 General: Patient is in no acute distress, is well nourished, and answers 
appropriately
 Neuro: A&Ox3, CN II-XII are intact, motor and sensation grossly intact 
 HEENT: EOMI, PERRLA, sclera anicteric, no conjunctival pallor, no signs or 
pharyngeal erythema, lesions, or ulcers
 Neck: Trachea is midline, no elevation in JVD or hepatojugular reflex, no 
palpable lymph nodes, could not palpate thyroid
Submitted 2021 07 06 
 CV: Tachycardic with faint heart sounds, could not distinguish between S1 and 
S2, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops
 Lungs: Normal inspiratory effort. Lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no 
wheezes, rhonchi, or rales 
 Abdominal: Soft and nondistended. Normal BS. Nontender to palpation in all 
four quadrants. No rigidity. The liver and spleen were not palpable.
 Extremities: Radial and DP and 2+/2+ and symmetric. No signs of edema in 
skins bilaterally. Warm and well perfused. 
 Skin: No evidence of rashes, skin breakdown, ulcers, or bruises.
Labs and Studies:
 BMP: Na 135, K 3.5, Ca, Cl, Cr 1.1, BUN 21
 Glucose 126
 LFT: Tbil 1.3, AlkPhos 227, AST 134, ALT 178, Albumin 3.3
 Lactate: 1.6
 CBC: WBC 2.8, Hb 12.9, Plt 60k
 RUQ ultrasound: No abnormalities including no signs of obstruction of cystic duct 
or CBD
 Urine analysis: 1+ protein and blood, Urobilinogen present
 Chest CT w/ IV contrast: no abnormalities found in lungs, signs of splenomegaly 
in superior cuts and calcifications in liver
Assessment:
This is a 61 year-old-male with PMH of HTN/HLD that had new onset fever and fatigue 5 
days ago for which he has been home medicating with Tylenol OTC. His ROS includes 
pertinent negatives of no sore throat / coryza / nausea / vomiting / change in stool / new 
muscle or joint pain / or new rashes or skin ulcers. On physical exam he has no 
evidence of jaundice, palpable cervical lymph nodes, or significant findings on 
pulmonary exam but is tachycardic and has lab work notable for low WBC count, low 
platelets, and elevated AST and ALT with initial read from lab technician suggestive of 
parasitic infection. 
Plan:
1. New onset fever and fatigue: The patient’s constitutional symptoms of fatigue / 
fever / rigors with tranaminitis and presence of blood and urobilinogen in urine 
with radiographic signs of splenomegaly are concerning for hepatitis with 
possible hemolytic anemia. Given the early read on RWJUH lab work of possible 
parasitic infection the differential should be focused on parasitic agents that may 
cause this picture, and ordering the appropriate tests. Of concern would be 
schisotosomiasis, babesios, leishmaniasis, and echinococcus. Schistosomia are 
perhaps highest on the differential as they can cause both GI and portal 
inflammation, possibly explaining the LFT abnormalities, and also GU tract 
inflammation, possibly explaining the blood in the urine. Treatment would be with 
Praziquantel and testing is by looking for ova in stool and urine. Babesios is 
transmitted by the same Ixodes tick as lyme disease and presents with fever and 
hemolytic anemia. It can also cause low platelets as seen in this gentlemen. 
This is also high on the differential given NJ’s geographic location. Diagnosis 
would be by blood smear and treatment atovaqune and azithromycin. 
Leishmaniasis presents with spiking fevers, hepatosplenomegaly, and 
pancytopenia as is transmitted by the sandfly. Serum antigen tests should be 
Submitted 2021 07 06 
performed and treatment would be with amphotericin B. Echinococcus is 
classically transmitted by the sheep dog via contaminated food and can cause 
calcifications in liver as well as hydatid cysts that can rupture. Calcifications 
were seen on RUQ US but no cysts, making this less likely. Treatment would be 
with albendazole. While the differential is focused on parasitic causes of 
hepatitis other causes should not be ignored. These include viral hepatitis and 
medication induced. This gentlemen has been taking Tylenol for his fevers and 
may have ingested up to 5g per day if he is taking the extra strength 500mg 
tablets. A Tylenol level should be ordered to see if treatment with NAQ is 
required. Lastly, while an infectious source seems most likely given his 
constitution of symptoms and should be the focus of the initial workup, a 
hematologic neoplastic source must also be considered.
2. Longstanding HTN and HLD: Continue at-home medications in consultation with 
his cardiologist