
Having read your third H&P, I am pleased with the growth that it shows compared to your first two (very good) write-ups.
My comments follow:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you indicate the informant and her reliability right up front. Keep up this sound practice!
2. Because someone who may read this note in the future may not have a calendar handy, it would be best to state, in
the chief complaint, its duration or its onset relative to the time of admission. In this case you might have said "two days
prior to admission" rather than "Saturday morning".
3. Your introductory statements in the HPI are PERFECT!! You gave the relevant history AND stated the patient's
apparent state of health when it all started.
4. Before I forget, let me commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in this entire document.
5. The HPI is written with excellent attention to chronology, making it much easier for the reader to synthesize the actual
sequence of events and, as it turns out, making it much easier to arrive at a likely diagnosis.
6. What you have included in the past medical history really is all HPI and need not be repeated.
7. It might have been relevant to include the heavy menstrual period in the HPI, as it may represent a bleeding diathesis.
8. ...and it would be more informative to state explicitly that the number of pads used is per day (or whatever time unit it
is).
9. It is EXCELLENT that you have indicated the ages of her parents. It would be more complete to do the same for the
siblings and children.
10. The clotting history of the great aunt should probably be included in the HPI.
11. Several items in the ROS are really related to the HPI and should be included there, without repeating them in the
ROS.
12. In the ROS you mention paraspinal tenderness. Be aware that tenderness is a physical sign; the symptom correlating
with it is pain. The history should only include symptoms, not signs. (I know that this is nit-picking, but I have to teach you
what is correct. You have a crotchety old goat for an H&P advisor.)
13. It is very good that you gave the BMI for this patient. It actually yields a diagnosis that would have been good to
include in your Assessment/Plan section.
14. I am a little surprised that there was no conjunctival pallor at the time of admission, as the hemoglobin initially was 9.1,
which, I believe, would give most people pale conjunctivae.
15. To me, the stark yet transient differences in the electrolytes on 8/14 compared with the day before and after, raise
questions about the accuracy of the data from 8/14.
16. Your Assessment/Plan section is excellent...BUT...you state that the patient is "not anemic" which, I believe, she was
on the day of admission, with a hemoglobin of 9.1.
16.a. Please be aware that the word "data" is plural, not singular. Your work will be more scholarly if you use plural
verbs with "data" as the subject.
16.b. It is very commendable that you recognize her financial plight as an issue that has to be dealt with as part of
her overall management. In fact, I would not let her be discharged without input from a social worker. As you may know, I
am of the opinion that every patient admitted should have a social work consult as part of the initial evaluation which, I
believe, would probably shave substantial time from the hospital's average length of stay and might alleviate the back-up
of admitted patients in the emergency room (because the inpatient beds that they are waiting for might become empty
sooner if social workers could facilitate discharge planning).
17. I believe that morbid obesity is a major problem for this patient and should be included in her diagnoses. It may well
be that her back pain is caused and/or aggravated by her extreme obesity.
18. I agree with you that reliable outpatient physician follow-up is mandatory for this patient. Anticoagulation has been
compared to walking a tightrope in a wind tunnel. It is often very, very difficult to maintain proper balance. To me, patients
receiving warfarin are in a special category of risk for an adverse event and checking the INR only monthly, as was the
case with this patient, is not sufficient. The DOACs don't require blood tests to monitor them, but patients receiving them
should be closely monitored. Arranging this and assuring the patient's adherence to recommendations may be things that
can be shared between physicians, advance-practice nurses, and social workers.
19. Your EBM was right on point and an extremely important reference to apply to this patient. The one thing I didn't see
was the year of publication, which should be included in all references.
your work is getting better and better (after starting from quite a good level), and I have no doubt that you will
achieve a degree of excellence that will distinguish you among your peers. I look forward to your next write-ups.
Bruce Fisher
8/18/22, 1:52 PM Re: H&P 3
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
-----Original Message-----
