
Yet another superb write-up. It has so many strengths!!!
There are a couple of points for some polish, as you've come to expect from me:
1. I commend you for indicating all of your informants PLUS the reliability of each.
2. You now have incorporated the practice of giving the duration of the chief complaint right up front. This has
differential diagnostic significance.
3. Much of what you give in your introductory statement as past medical history is really an integral part of the history of
dyspnea on exertion. Ideally you should give a sentence or two about each of these items, when they began and how well
they have been controlled up to the onset of the chief complaint. This is a very difficult task, one that will take a lot of time
to master, and the way you wrote the introductory statement is not necessarily a bad thing; but if you can somehow
summarize the chronology of these things that may contribute to dyspnea on exertion, it will ultimately make the current
diagnosis easier to extract from the clinical information.
4. A few lines down from the beginning of the HPI you say "he was in his usual state until one month..." but you don't
explicitly tell the reader what that status is. Had his overall symptoms been well compensated when he began to feel
worse?
5. You know me and "ago". I prefer "prior to admission" but many people don't really care about this. Your misfortune is
having me as your H&P advisor.
6. The same thing goes for "today" which I think is better expressed as "the day of admission". The idea is to use the
moment of admission as the point of reference for every event in the history. This makes it possible for someone to read
your narrative at any subsequent time and still have a clear sense of the chronology of the illness and the evolution of
symptoms.
7. You mention that he uses two pillows to sleep. It would be more complete to include why he uses two pillows: Is it
something orthopedic, or is it orthopnea?
8. Let me again compliment you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse"!!!!!!!
9. As mentioned above, much of what you give as PMH is really part of the HPI and need not be repeated under the
heading of PMH. To me, PMH and HPI are mutually exclusive.
10. You need not repeat in the past surgical history interventions that are mentioned in the HPI (Watchman, Pacemaker).
11. It is relevant to state when the toe amputations occurred, and to indicate why they were necessary. I assume these
were the result of diabetes-related vascular insufficiency, but it is best to be explicit. It could have been emboli related to
atrial fibrillation. Also, state which toes.
12. (As an aside, the use of Lasix is very interesting. It, together with his renal insufficiency, may have an impact on the
patient's gout. It would be interesting to know whether the gout preceded the use of Lasix.)
13. It would be more complete to give the ages of the parents, whether alive or dead. Also, is the son who had Ewing's
sarcoma alive? If not, at what age did he die?
14. It is ideal to give the actual chronology of the smoking: When he started and when (if) he stopped.
15. His occupation as a firefighter is relevant to the complaint of dyspnea on exertion and should be mentioned in the HPI.
16. Your use of "see HPI" in the ROS is very good.
17. I commend your inclusion of the rhythm with the vital signs. But it is striking that it was regular, since he has
a significant history of atrial fibrillation.
18. I commend your noting the neck circumference. Did you happen to measure it? Does it have implications in
the rest of his problems? (it raises the risk of obstructive sleep apnea.)
19. Although the phrase "regular rate and rhythm" is enshrined in common usage, it is really only the rhythm that is
"regular". It is interesting in this patient, who has had such problems with atrial fibrillation in the past, that the rhythm is
regular at this time.
20. Although many people speak of "hepatojugular reflex" it is actually "reflux" because it refers to backflow up the jugular
vein.
21. I am delighted that you did the scratch test for liver size. Ideally, having done that, you should record the dimension
from dome to tip, the "liver span" (usually in centimeters, sometimes including how far below the right costal margin it
extends).
22. In describing the cardiac findings on the chest film, it would be more complete to include mention of the cardiac size.
23. Your summary, yet again, is outstanding for its focus and thoroughness. The one thing I might want you to
mention is the potential impact of the anemia on his symptoms and the pathophysiology of the congestive heart failure.
24. In your assessment and plan, your discussion of the patient's dyspnea is superb and, with your literature
citation, clearly puts you in the RIME category of Educator. This is wonderful!
25. (I have to do this: The spelling is "guaiac" and not "guiac".
10/9/2020 Re: H&P3
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
26. GI bleeding can contribute to pre-renal azotemia.
27. In your mention of hepatomegaly, you don't make reference to the KUB film. Usually one can get a sense for liver size
from this image. If there is a question, it might be useful to get an ultrasound of the RUQ to assess not only liver size, but
also whether there might be a mass in the liver affecting its size.
this is a truly superb write-up, excellent in its own right but also reflecting inspiring growth that you have
achieved in a very short time. I can only imagine how much you will achieve and how much good you will do as your
career moves forward. Our profession is lucky to have you in it.
I will complete the EPA form next.
Have a great week-end.
