

Once again I wish to thank you for getting the H&P to me at a time that enables me to review it in a timely fashion so that I
can get my comments back to you while they are, I hope, most useful. This write-up has, as have the others, many
strengths, which I will mention, and there are a few constructive suggestions that I will also offer. They are as follows:
1. I commend you for indicating the informant and her reliability right up front. This makes is much easier for the reader
to interpret the information that is recorded.
2. Although in the HPI you indicate the duration of the immediate problem, it would be ideal to include this with the chief
complaint itself.
3. This is a patient whose present illness began some years prior to this admission, and you do state this clearly. It is a
good practice, in situations such as this, to state clearly what the patient's health was like at the very onset of the present
illness and what the initial symptoms were. Sometimes (not in this case) patients are labeled with a diagnosis incorrectly
and if you give the earliest manifestations this information my change the reader's impression of what the present illness
actually is. If one of the goals is to record the history of the entire present illness (as you did quite well), it is always
valuable to include the pre-morbid status and the earliest manifestations of the present illness.
4. You mention an earlier hospitalization for a similar problem. In an illness such as this it is more complete to state
whether, during that hospitalization, management with mechanical ventilation was needed and, if possible, the dose of
steroid needed to bring about improvement. This may have an impact on how the patient is managed during the early part
of the current hospitalization.
5. It would be more complete to state, as quantitatively as possible, the patient's exercise tolerance prior to the onset of
the current exacerbation and the extent to which (and rhythm [e.g., abrupt or gradual] by which) this exercise tolerance has
decreased leading up the current admission. If it is simply progression of her underlying disease, I would expect the
decrease to be relatively gradual; if it is abrupt, then the differential diagnosis shifts to an event such as an infection or a
pulmonary embolism to name two.
5.a. It would be useful to know if she uses a pulse oximeter at home and, if she does, what her usual O2 saturation
is.
6. Although you (excellently) mention the content of her inhaler in the medications, it would have been appropriate to
mention this information when you state that she is using the inhaler more frequently in the HPI>
7. Given what could cause the current episode (although it didn't), fever would be a pertinent negative in the HPI.
8. For any respiratory complaint, it is important to include orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, whether present
or absent, in the HPI.
Because this is a chronic illness that is very severe, writing the HPI for it is extremely difficult. You did it very well, and I
don't want you to be daunted by the extent of my comments above. But when you are as strong a student as you are,
Emma, then I suspect that you would like to be even stronger. That is the purpose of these comments, and not, in any
way, to make you feel that your work is anything but excellent.
9. Because all of the medications listed in that part of the history are directed at her present illness, some (including me)
would put these in a brief concluding paragraph in the end of the HPI, and then, under medications, say "see HPI".
10. It is amazing that her reaction to benzonatate is cough, since it is an anti-tussive. I wonder if this is allergy or some
sort of intolerance. Do we know whether this specific reaction is immune-mediated?
11. Your rendition of the ROS is excellent.
12. Given the chief complaint, it would be more complete to describe whether her respirations are labored or abnormally
shallow, in the vitals.
13. Your rendition of the general appearance is excellent. It is possible that her work of breathing consumes so many
calories that she has not been able to gain weight.
14. I agree that this is a patient whose chest should have been percussed (as should they all). In addition, it would have
been cool to try to elicit egophony, although it probably would have been absent.
15. This is a patient in whom hepatojugular reflux should have been looked for.
16. Given her thinness, this would have been a very easy liver size to quantify.
17. In this patient, the presence or absence of clubbing of the digits (fingers and toes) should have been mentioned.
18. I don't think that a lesion of 1 to 2 cm in size can be called a petechia, a term that is usually used for pinpoint or, at
most, pinhead size. If these were non-blanching hemorrhagic lesions, they are purpura.
19. It is notable that the CO2 in the electrolytes is high (33). This may be a result of CO2 retention because of chronic
respiratory insufficiency. Many people would get arterial blood gases on patients like this, at least as a baseline, as it may
affect how oxygen is administered. If she is retaining CO2 enough, she may not have much of a hypoxic drive and, in
3/16/23, 11:23 AM Re: H&P5
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
some patients, supplemental oxygen without positive pressure can really suppress respiration. In instances like that
BiPAP, CPAP, or even mechanical ventilation may be needed to get them past the acute episode.
20. This is a philosophical/sematic point: to me, this episode more likely represents progression of her underlying illness,
and not an exacerbation. She may be reaching a point at which she no longer can compensate for her worsening status.
That is not unusual in chronic, progressive illnesses.
21. As for the leukocytosis, which is mild, it can't be interpreted without a differential white count. If she has a "left shift"
(increased percentage of immature white cells), then an acute inflammatory event is more likely. As she is not on chronic
steroids, this is not a consideration unless she was recently tapered off them following her prior hospitalization.

 this is a very difficult patient to write up, and I feel that you did it very well, especially for a third-year student, but
even if you had been further along in your training. You should feel confident in what you do and pleased with what you
have achieved in what is really a very short interval. I am eager to see your final H&P effort next week, and to see you on
Monday and experience your oral presentation.
Have a great weekend!

