History and Physical Exam
Patient Name: 
Date: 09/29/2020
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Chief Complaint: Pain, pus, and neck swelling from spider bite
History of Present Illness:
Mr. R is a 58-year-old man presenting with pain and neck swelling from a spider bite. His symptoms 
started 6 days ago, on Wednesday 09/23, when he woke up suddenly after a small brown spider bit his 
posterior neck. On Thursday 09/24, he felt the pain intensify and described it as a tightness. On Friday 
09/25, the pain transformed into being sharp and burning. He described it as unbearable and a 10 out of 
10 on severity. On Saturday 09/26, yellow pus began draining from the swollen bite site. On Sunday 
09/27, the pain and swelling reduced, however, he began experiencing night sweats. Between Sunday 
09/27 and today 09/29, the pain has reduced, but there has been continuous pus drainage from the site 
of the spider bite. He came to the ED today because his mother urged him to. Today, he describes the 
pain as a 7/8 out of 10. The pain does not radiate and is localized to the swollen areas in his posterior 
neck and lower scalp. Mr. R self-managed the pain by applying ice packs and cleaning the area with soap 
and water. Extra strength Tylenol provided pain relief three hours later. His neck pain has affected his 
sleep and Mr. R notes only sleeping in increments of 30mins – 1hour on most days this past week.
On review of systems, he reports nausea after eating which has restricted his food intake for the past 
week. He has not vomited. He is also experiencing diffuse abdominal pain which began on Thursday and 
he describes as a 3/4 out of 10, diffuse, crampy and possibly associated with hunger. He reports polyuria 
and polydipsia as well, but does not have headaches, fever, dizziness, or blurry vision. Patient states that 
he does not have any chronic medical problems such as diabetes or hypertension, and that he does not 
have a primary care doctor and has not gotten lab work for the past three years. 
Upon arriving in the ED, prior to being evaluated by the Internal Medicine team, Mr. R was tachycardic 
at 121bpm and had mild fever at 100.1°F, triggering the sepsis protocol. Tetanus prophylaxis was 
administered, and he was given Vancomycin 2g IVPB and 1 bolus Normal Saline initially. Following a 
lactate measured at 2.8, he was given another 1L of Normal Saline. Tylenol 1000mg PO was ordered to 
manage his pain and fever. Notable lab values include WBC 12.6, Na+
129, Glucose 277, HCO3-
17.1, and 
Anion Gap 25. A CT was ordered to evaluate for an abscess and Acute Surgery was consulted. Mr. R is 
scheduled for incision and drainage in the OR tomorrow and as per instructions from the Surgery team, 
Mr. R received Piperacillin-Tazobactam 4.5g IVPB. The Surgery team has requested Mr. R to be admitted 
on the medical floor. 
Past Medical History:
Rectal Bleeding, 09/01/09
Anemia, 09/01/09
Past Surgical History:
None
Medications:
None
Allergies:
None
Family History:
None
Social History:
Mr. R lives with his friend and his friend’s mom. Employment and marital status not assessed. He does 
not smoke, drink alcohol, or do any recreational drugs. He has not been exercising recently due to the 
neck pain but wants to do so. He does not have a primary care doctor and the last time he recieved labs
was in 2016/2017.
Review of Systems:
General – no fevers, no chills, no recent illnesses, reports night sweats 
HEENT – no headaches, no blurry vision, reports neck pain and swelling which intensifies while lying 
down
Cardiac – no chest pain on rest or on exertion, no palpitations
Pulm – no shortness of breath or cough
GI – reports abdominal pain and nausea, no vomiting, no diarrhea, no abnormal bowel movements
GU – no dysuria or nocturia
Neuro – no confusion, no numbness or weakness, no difficulty ambulating
Endocrine – reports polydipsia and polyuria
MSK – no other aches or pains
Skin – not assessed
Physical Exam:
Vitals - Temp 100.1°F (oral), HR: 121, BP 195/94 (Max 224/178), RR: 18, SpO2: 97% on room air, Weight: 
114kg
General – Patient is an older African American man, appearing his age, sitting up in an
ED bed in no acute distress. 
HEENT – Normal conjunctiva and sclera, PERRLA, EOMI, JVD, mucus membranes moist
Neck – 10cm area of tenderness, erythema, and induration on right posterior lateral neck with 1cm 
ulceration draining yellow purulent fluid. Pain on palpation of right upper back, right lower scalp and 
behind the right ear.
Cardiac – RRR, normal S1 and S2, no rubs murmurs or gallops
Pulm – CTAB, no acute respiratory distress
Abdomen - He experiences distress when asked to lie down for the abdominal exam. Soft, 
nondistended, and nontender. No rebound tenderness or organomegaly. Normal bowel sounds. 
Pelvic – Not conducted
Extremities – no edema bilaterally, well perfused, distal pulses intact
Neuro – AAOx3, CN 2-12 intact, sensation and strength intact, gait normal
Psych – Not conducted
Labs:
Imaging 
CT Neck Soft Tissue with Contrast
Impression: large area of phlegmon extending inferiorly from the base of the skull along the 
posterior right neck subcutaneous and intramuscular soft tissues. Additional peripherally rimenhancing lesion involving subcutaneous tissues at the level of the scapula posteriorly 
measuring 3.3x2.1x2.1cm which may represent an additional abscess versus a necrotic lymph 
node.
Chest 1 view
Blunted left CP angle
No infiltrates, no pneumothorax 
Normal heart size, mildly tortuous aorta
Right AC joint degenerative changes. Degenerative spondylitic changes of the thoracic spine.
EKG 12 Lead Adult – Sinus Tachycardia, Nonspecific ST Abnormality
Systolic BP 195mmHg
Diastolic BP 94mmHg
Ventricular Rate 122bpm
Atrial Rate 122bpm
P-R Interval 150ms
QRS Duration 82ms
Q-T Interval 324ms
QTC Calculation (Bezet) 461ms
P Axis 72°
R Axis 39°
T axis 38°
Summary:
Mr. R is a 58-year-old man presenting with neck pain and swelling surrounding began after a spider bite 
one week ago. Review of systems is positive for abdominal pain, polyuria, and polydipsia. Physical exam 
shows a 10cm area of tenderness, erythema, and induration on right posterior lateral neck with 1cm 
ulceration draining yellow purulent fluid. Labs show glucose 338, Na+
129, HCO3 -
17.1, Lactate 2.8,
Anion Gap 25, and WBC 16.2. Most likely etiology is cellulitis complicated by DKA and new onset DM.
Assessment and Plan:
1. Spider Bite - Though Mr. R attributes his neck pain and swelling to a spider bite, the appearance 
of the wound and the severity of the pain, either a skin abscess, or cellulitis, are a more likely 
diagnosis. These conditions are caused by bacteria entering the skin through a break in the skin, 
which could have been caused by the spider bite. Patients with cellulitis often have systemic 
symptoms as well, such as fever, chills, and malaise, as is present in Mr. R’s history. Although 
both cellulitis and erysipelas manifest as skin erythema and edema, as is the case with Mr. R, 
cellulitis involves the deeper dermis and subcutaneous fat has a more indolent course with 
localized symptoms. Cellulitis can present with purulence. A skin abscess is an equally likely
diagnosis because it presents as a painful, fluctuant wound with surrounding cellulitis, and 
spontaneous drainage. Although systemic symptoms such as fevers and chills are unusual, the 
location of the wound in the neck lends support to this diagnosis. Cellulitis often presents in the 
lower extremities. Other conditions on the differential are necrotizing fasciitis, less likely due to 
the absence of crepitus and hemodynamic stability. Toxic shock syndrome and gas gangrene 
should also be ruled out.
PLAN: Follow up with the Acute Surgery team regarding incision and drainage scheduled for 
tomorrow and get information about the plan for wound care. Continue Vancomycin and 
Piperacillin-Tazobactam treatment. Consult infectious diseases and follow up with wound, 
blood, and urine culture in case of complications of cellulitis and abscess like bacteremia, 
endocarditis, septic arthritis or osteomyelitis, metastatic infection, and sepsis. Give 
Tylenol 650mg q 6 hours PRN for pain and Keterolac injection 15mg IV push q 6 hours 
for severe pain. 
2. Hyperglycemia – Mr. R’s presentation of abdominal pain and nausea with a history of polyuria 
and polydipsia along with lab values (glucose 338, Na+
129, HCO3 -
17.1, Lactate 2.8, Anion Gap 
25) make diabetic ketoacidosis the most likely diagnosis. The patient has an unknown history of 
diabetes mellitus complicated by inconsistent primary care and lack of family history. On 
admission, their glucose was 377. On the differential is fasting ketoacidosis since Mr. R does 
report being unable to eat enough during these past few days due to nausea. An increase in 
lactic acid levels (lactate – 2.8) due to infection can also cause anion gap acidosis and is likely in 
this patient. Ketoacidosis can occur without hyperglycemia in patients with chronic alcoholism, 
but Mr. R does not drink. 
PLAN: Urinalysis to look for glucose and ketones in the urine and confirm DKA. For 
hyperglycemia, give IV insulin – Regular 0.1units/kg as IV bolus and then 0.1 units/kg/hour 
continuous insulin infusion. If the serum glucose does not fall by 50-70mg/dL in the first hour, 
insulin can be doubled. When serum glucose reaches 200mg/dL, insulin infusion can be reduced 
to 0.02-0.05 units/kg/hour IV or rapid acting insulin at 0.1 units/kg can be given subcutaneously
every two hours. Target for serum glucose is 150-200mg/dL. Continue IV normal saline. Serum 
potassium is normal as of now so 20-30mEq of potassium can be given with each liter of IV fluid
to keep serum potassium between 4 and 5 mEq/L. Electrolytes, BUN, venous pH, creatinine, and 
glucose should be checked every 2-4 hours. 
Fluids: IV NS at 100cc/hour 
Electrolytes: replete
Nutrition: NPO
Anticoagulation: none
DISPO: Med/Surg 
Code status: unknown