
I have carefully read your second H&P and have several comments, some laudatory and some with constructive
suggestions. They are as follows:
1. It is excellent that you identified the informant and the reliability of the informant right up front. That is a convention
that is very important, as it enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is reported. (We
always want what is in an H&P to stand up to scrutiny regarding its accuracy.)
2. Although it is valuable to summarize relevant past medical history in the introductory statement of the HPI, it is
important, especially in a patient like this whose antecedent history is really what led up to his chief complaint, to begin the
HPI with the initial manifestations of the present illness or the earliest risk factors for it. With this patient, he clearly has
antecedent history that is very relevant to his chief complaint. It would be most effective to begin with the very first
symptoms of his heart disease and then record the events that led up to his mitral valve surgery. Then you would record
his course after the mitral valve surgery, including the history of rhythm disturbances and their treatment, his response to
these treatments, and his use of anticoagulants. That would give the reader a coherent, chronological narrative that very
often enables the reader to make a very tenable diagnosis from the history alone.
3. It is good that you indicate, in the HPI, when the syncopal episode occurred (2 days earlier). It would have been even
more effective to include this information in the chief complaint, It would also be helpful to state why the patient waited two
days after a syncopal episode to see medical treatment.
4. Throughout this write-up you have used the word "denied" repeatedly. Please try very hard to stop using this word in
reporting the absence of a symptom. There are neutral phrases that should be used, such as "does not report" or "has not
experienced", among several others. Please see the slides I sent you on the oral presentation, several of which discuss
this in detail.
5. Several items that you record in the Past Medical History are cardiac and belong as part of the narrative of the HPI. If
you had put them there, you could have simply said, for the Past Medical History, :"in addition to what is in the HPI, ..."
6. In the past medical history you have included many 2022 dates in the right hand column. It is not clear what this
means.
7. In the PMH you mention OSA, which is very important. It would be reasonable to include the symptoms that led to this
diagnosis, whether he had had a sleep study to confirm it, how it has been managed, and whether he has had
improvement in his sleep with this management.
8. In the Past Surgical History, it would be more complete to include when the cholecystectomy was done.
9. The same is true for the tonsillectomy, especially in a patient with sleep apnea.
10. I commend you for including the doses of the medications listed.
11. It is doubtful that myalgias are a manifestation of allergy to Cialis. It might make more sense to use the heading
"Allergies/Intolerances" as it may be that the myalgias represent an intolerance rather than an allergy.
12. In the Family History, children should be included, and the age of each individual listed should be given.
13. Although 1.5 pack-years isn't much smoking history, it would be more complete to say when he started, when he
stopped, why he stopped, and what his actual daily tobacco use was.
14. The overall content of your Review of Systems is very good (although you used the word "denies" repeatedly).
14a. Some of what you listed in the review of systems are actually physical findings and not symptoms. What you
listed under "Skin" is all physical examination and not symptoms. The ROS should include only symptoms, with physical
findings (signs) placed in the physical examination.
14b. Several of the items in your ROS are properly part of the HPI and should be listed there.
15. It is conventional to include a description of the cardiac rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs.
16. You contradict yourself in the physical when, under CV, you describe him as tachcycardic but you had listed the heart
rate above as only 88, which does not meet the definition of tachycardia. I know that you are referring to other
observations when he had runs of rapid rates, but it is not a good idea to have internal contradictions in the write-up. They
detract from the credibility of the overall document.
17. It is commendable that you note that his is not SOB while speaking. One way to describe this is "able to speak in
complete sentences".
18. You note that he has "no right sided neck pain with palpation". Please be aware that "pain" is a symptom. The
physical sign that corresponds to "pain" is 'tenderness". It would have been more accurate to state that he had "no
tenderness with palpation".
19. It is conventional to estimate the loudness of a heart murmur on a scale of 1 to 6,, where 5 includes a palpable thrill
and 6 is a murmur that you can her with the stethoscope not touching the chest wall.
20. As he had had a midline sternotomy for the mitral valve surgery, he must have had a scar in the area. Scars are very
important physical signs and should always be included in the physical exam. (The same is true for tattoos.)
21. This is a chest that should have been percussed (as they all should).
9/22/22, 11:50 AM H&P 2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
22. I commend you for percussing the abdomen.
23. Please quantify the dimensions of the liver instead of just saying that there is no hepatomegaly.
24. Given the potential neurologic nature of the chief complaint, this patient should have had more of neurologic exam
than just describing his mental status and mood and affect.
25. You have expended a huge amount of space by pasting technical aspects of the imaging studies. Please try to show
that you have thought about the results by summarizing the findings. You need not record how the procedure was done in
your H&P document.
26. In your Assessment and Plan your summary statement is very good, succinct and well-focused.
27. Your discussion of syncope as a problem for this patient is very nicely done.
28. In discussing the rhythm abnormalities you mention the EKG but you did not describe its findings in your listing of the
labs and imaging results. It would have made sense to put this information together with the other labs and imaging
results.
29. Given the problems with rhythm that appear to be paroxysmal, it would have been appropriate to recommend
ambulatory monitoring for at least a few days, to determine how often these rhythm disturbances are occurring. They may
not always cause symptoms noted by the patient.
30. In considering the impact of his heart conditions, it would have been more complete to ask about his exercise
tolerance, in the HPI and then include that in your discussion under the Assessment and Plan.
31. Given his anemia and the possibility of iron loss and his use of an anticoagulant, it would have been very desirable to
test his stools for occult blood.
32. Because of his history of prostate cancer, he should be followed regularly with prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
measurements.
while this write-up is more of a true H&P than your initial one, and it is clearly better than the first one you
submitted, I hope that you will act on the suggestions for improvement that I have made. Pasting material from one part of
the chart into another is not a practice that you should assimilate, as you have done with the imaging study reports. I am
looking forward to a third H&P that will continue to show improvement in your work.
Respectfully,
