
It is hard to believe that this is near the end of your sixth (and last) week of the internal medicine clerkship. It is amazing
how fast time passes!
I appreciate your having gotten the sixth H&P to me by Wednesday evening, so that I can get my comments back to you in
a timely manner. And I want you to know that you have shown enormous growth and improvement over these six weeks.
My "usual" comments follow:
1. I commend you for identifying the informant and clearly stating her reliability as an informant from the very beginning.
2. I commend you for giving the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself.
3. You begin with a statement of her health status at the onset of the HPI (which, really, is also, in this case, the onset of
the chief complaint). This is a very sound practice.
4. It astonishes me that the doctors who saw her on 10/8 did not work her up for meningitis on that day, which appears to
have been two days prior to this admission.
5. I want to reinforce your (new) practice of not repeating in the Review of Systems what is already given in the HPI.
Keep up this good practice.
7. You avoided the word "denied" almost completely in this write-up. Bravo!
8. In the Past Medical History it would be a little more complete to mention the extent to which the hypertension and
asthma are controlled. The former is especially relevant when headache is part of the HPI.
9. Your use of "allegedly" in describing the potassium and magnesium issues is not really appropriate. If it is someone's
presumption, it would be more appropriate to say "presumptively". "Allegedly" has negative connotations and is not
usually used in a medical context.
10. I commend you for including intolerances with the allergy considerations. This is a very important distinction and it
appears that you have assimilated this into your practice, which pleases me very much.
11. You have mentioned that she had a gastric sleeve procedure earlier in the write-up and this should have been
mentioned specifically in the Past Surgical History.
12. It is excellent that you included her level of education in the Social History. That is always relevant.
13. In the Family History, it would be more complete to include the ages of her parents, any siblings, and both children.
(You only listed the 16 year-old daughter.)
14. In the Physical Exam, it is excellent that you mentioned the neck scar. It would be even better to have included the
abdominal scars also (cholecystectomy and ovarian cyst removal).
15. In the cardiovascular section you mention that percussion of the anterior chest is "flat". This is a very, very abnormal
finding, suggesting complete replacement of the lungs by something solid. The normal finding, except over the heart, is
resonance, not flatness. Is this what you meant?
16. Although she is obese, it still would have been appropriate to estimate the liver size. The "scratch" test works for any
body habitus.
17. It pleases me greatly that you included the MCV and RDW in the red cell indices. Especially given the high RDW, it
would have been useful to look at a peripheral smear to see if there might have been more than one population of red
blood cells.
18. Was a white blood cell count done on the cerebrospinal fluid? You mention a normal peripheral white blood cell count
but there is no mention of the presence or absence of cells in the CSF. You do mention a gram stain of the CSF.
19. It is impressive that you included a steroid if the patient had bacterial meningitis. Be aware that the initial dose of
steroid should PRECEDE the first dose of antimicrobial, to antagonize the inflammatory response to release of toxins by
organisms lysed by the antimicrobial.
20. I am impressed that you considered Listeria among the gram-positive organisms. They are, of course, rods, and
would be strikingly obvious on gram stain if present.
21. Part of her hypokalemia may be due to potassium losses from diarrhea, as well as from vomiting.
22. Overall, your Assessment and Plan section is very good.
in six short weeks you have shown excellent improvement. Honestly, in the beginning I was a little worried about
you, but now I have no doubt that you will succeed. You clearly have put a huge amount of work into your selfimprovement and the result is inspiring. Do not doubt yourself as you move forward, and meet each challenge as you
have done with what you have faced in the internal medicine clerkship. I wish you every success.
Respectfully,
