
Your timing of sending this H&P was just fine, and gives me time to get my comments back to you at a time that enables
you to apply them to subsequent work.
BEFORE I SAY ANYTHING ELSE I WANT TO TELL YOU THAT THIS H&P IS VASTLY IMPROVED OVER THE FIRST
THREE. In addition to my suggestions for improvement, I will, of course, point out what I believe to be the strengths that
you displayed.
1. It is EXCELLENT that you have given a brief explanation of what makes this patient a less-than-completely-reliable
informant.
2. It is EXCELLENT that you included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. I'm not sure that you needed to repeat the chief complaint after stating the "principal problem". But that is a small
detail.
4. Your rendering of the history of present illness is extremely good, clearly stated with enough detail yet succinct and
well-focused. The one and only suggestion that I have is that you might have wanted to state clearly the stability of her
health at the time she injured her leg. It is always a good practice to introduce the present illness with a statement of the
patient's overall health at the onset of the present illness (not necessarily the chief complaint, although in this instance that
is where the present illness does begin).
5. Except for one instance, you avoided "denies" completely. Bravo!
6. In describing her response to the antibiotics near the end of the HPI, it would have been a little more informative to
state how long after the first dose of antibiotics this occurred.
7. I commend you for not repeating things when you list the ROS and the PMH.
8. This may be a small point, but I ask you to consider not using the word "committed" when reporting a suicide.
"Committed" suggests a crime, and suicide is really a severe symptom of an underlying illness most of the time. Please
consider saying something like "died from suicide" instead. I note that many of the newscasters on TV and radio have
stopped using "committed" in this context.
9. Your rendition of the smoking history is perfect!
10. I am delighted that you have added "intolerances" to your section on allergies.
11. I commend you for including the BMI in the general description. Some would even include it among the vital signs.
12. Perhaps you might consider more detailed description of the location of the wound. Was it proximal or distal to the
lateral malleolus? And how far proximal or distal to it?
13. With what did you probe the wound to touch the bone? Was it a swab? (If so, what came out on it?)
14. I commend you for looking for crepitus in the inflamed area. When present it is of critical importance.
15. Nobody does gram stains anymore. In this case, if done prior to giving antibiotics, it would have had major impact on
the initial choice of antibiotics. I think it is one of the most neglected tests in our diagnostic toolbox.
16. Your assessment and plan section is, as usual, very good. It is useful to know that, for some reason, group B
Streptococci (Streptococcus agalactiae) is common colonizing flora on the lower extremities of diabetics.)
17. It is excellent that you have included the wound care service in your plan.
18. Given the very difficult home situation of this patient, I think it would have been a good idea to include formal
involvement of a social worker among the consultants caring for her.
Joshua, this H&P shows enormous improvement over your first three, and I am absolutely thrilled to see this. You are
obviously putting a lot of effort into your growth and development, and this is a very good thing. I look forward to your next
efforts with enthusiasm.
