
Having read your third H&P, I have several comments, some laudatory and some with constructive suggestions to add to
the strength of your work. But before I get to the "formal" comments, I want to thank you for submitting this H&P by early
Wednesday afternoon. That enables me to plan my work schedule most efficiently (and, to a certain extent, conveniently).
The actual comments:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you indicate the informant and the informant's reliability right up front. This is an important
convention to follow in all your H&Ps because it enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism when
reading the notes.
2. It is EXCELLENT that you state the duration of the chief complaint together with the chief complaint itself. As I have
mentioned, this may have significant influence on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
3. In reading the entire write-up, I infer that the chief complaint may be related to problems that had started quite a bit
before the actual onset of the chief complaint. While it may not be possible to conclude which system is involved in the
present illness until after you have finished taking the entire history (and, sometimes, until after you have completed the
physical exam), once you have completed these it should be possible to have a pretty good idea of the system involved,
and the ideal way to construct the narrative, with proper attention to chronology, is to start with the patient's general status
at the onset of the present illness (or even a risk factor, such as smoking), and then give, in chronological order, the events
that ultimately led up to the chief complaint. In the instance of this patient, it might even begin with the patient's health
status when she started to smoke cigarettes and then continue the narrative from there. The point is, the chief complaint is
often the most recent event in a story that may have begun much earlier.
4. In general, it is a good practice to time every event in the History of Present Illness with relation to the moment of
admission. Instead of giving a date or a day of the week, it is always clearer to say, "X days (or weeks or months...) prior
to admission..." or even "X hours prior to admission...".
5. As you have recorded it, it appears that this patient may have two parallel present illnesses to document, one
regarding her lungs and one regarding her heart. Sometimes it is a good idea to write these as two separate HPIs and
then, when possible, try to unify them with a brief statement after these two are recorded.
6. IF orthostatic vital signs were taken in the ER, it would be more complete to note these; if they were not, it would be
reasonable to note, in the HPI, that orthostatic vital signs were not elicited.
7. The timing of the "acute event overnight" should be given with regard to the time of admission, whether it preceded or
followed admission. This enables the reader to construct a proper chronological sequence for the events reported.
8. It is EXCELLENT that you indicated the absence of anosmia or ageusia, as these are pertinent negatives when
COVID is in the differential diagnosis.
9. It is very good that you mentioned the prior history of tuberculosis. It would have been more complete to indicate
whether she was treated for it and if so, for how long and whether she is believed not to have active TB at present.
10. Several items that you have allocated to the Past Medical History and Past Surgical History rightfully belong in the
HPI, as they involve lungs and heart.
11. It is EXCELLENT that you have recorded the doses of the patient's medications.
12. It is not clear from your section on allergies/intolerances whether the patient is actually allergic to cats. I inferred that
she is not, as she presently lives with cats. (If she were allergic to cats you would, of course, state how this allergy is
manifest.)
13. I am very pleased that you included, separately, mention of "intolerances" with mention of "allergies".
14. In the Family History, it would have been more complete to include her son and also the ages of each individual
mentioned in this section.
15. If my math is correct, it appears that she began to smoke at age 38, which is very unusual. Smoking almost always
begins at a much younger age.
16. Several items in the Review of Systems are already in the HPI and need not be repeated. Just say "see HPI" and
mention only what is not already mentioned there.
17. In the ROS, your description of the patient's mood and affect may be physical exam findings rather than part of the list
of symptoms in the Review of Systems.
18. The heart rate that you give in the vital signs is a prime number, which tells me that it is from a monitor. Also, I am
concerned that there is no mention of the premature beats that you describe in the EKG later on. One could say "the heart
rate is 97 with a regular rhythm and multiple premature beats" (if that was, in fact, the case). I can't emphasize enough the
importance of taking the patient's pulse by feeling it and not just relying on a monitor for the heart rate.
19. Given the information in the chief complaint and the HPI, and the fact that the patient is tachypneic, it would be
appropriate to describe the respirations, both for depth or shallowness and degree of effort involved in breathing. Also, it
9/29/22, 2:52 PM Re: H&P week 3
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
would be appropriate to comment on whether the chest expansions are symmetrical. Some patients, if they have pain on
one side of their chest, may breathe less deeply on that side, which may be noticeable on inspection during respirations.
20. I commend you for noting that the patient can speak in complete sentences. Given the respiratory nature of her
present illness, this is a significant finding.
21. I commend you for mentioning her surgical scars. It would be more complete to state where they are (e.g., the
appendectomy would be in the right lower quadrant; for the hysterectomy it could be midline or it could be suprapubic. You
would also state the length of the scars. Sometimes people also describe the appearance of the scars (e.g., well-healed
or, if not well-healed, what makes it seem that way).
22. It is EXCELLENT that you noted conjunctival pallor.
23. In this patient, with such prominent cardiorespiratory symptoms and history, it would have been very important to
describe the neck veins and whether hepatojugular reflux was present. I am attaching some slides on the neck vein exam.
24. This is definitely a chest that should have been percussed (as, really, they all should be). With the expiratory
wheezing, did you notice whether the expiratory phase of the respiratory cycle seemed prolonged (which indicates severe
bronchospasm)?
25. I am delighted that you percussed the abdomen.
26. It would have been appropriate to state the liver span, especially in a patient in whom congestive heart failure is a real
possibility.
27. I commend you for noting clubbing of the fingers. Was there clubbing of the toes?
28. To me, the absence of a serum albumin level, among the lab results, is a significant omission. Be aware that it is not
possible to interpret the serum calcium without knowing a simultaneous serum albumin.
29. In all patients, but especially in those who are anemic, it is valuable to include the MCV and the RDW in the results of
the CBC. It is important to know if anemia is microcytic or not, and if the RDW is above normal it suggests either
reticulocytosis (because reticulocytes are larger in diameter than mature red cells) or, sometimes, two populations of red
cells, as may be seen in some blood dyscrasias.
30. Given the high ProNP, I am a little surprised that your Assessment and Plan did not make any mention of congestive
heart failure among the patient's problems.
31. In describing the EKG, you mention "frequent premature ventricular complexes". You did not describe any
irregularities in the rhythm when you recorded the vital signs and you did not make any mention of a potential acute
cardiac event in your Assessment and Plan.
32. In your Summary Statement you mention that a CTA of the chest shows extensive bilateral PEs. (I assume this
means pulmonary emboli.) Given the seriousness of this finding and the likelihood that "extensive bilateral PEs" could
explain much about her current problem--and the urgent need to seek out and treat the underlying cause (venous thrombi
somewhere, either in her pelvis or lower extremities), I am surprised that you did not make any mention of pulmonary
emboli in your Assessment and Plan.
33. Be aware that pulmonary emboli and their associated infarcts can be accompanied by fever, and I would not attribute
the temperature of 100.1 only to infection.
34. In the sepsis paragraph of your A/P, you state "treating with Azithromycin or Ceftriaxone po". Be aware that
ceftriaxone is not an oral drug, only injectable.
35. Your section on HAP vs CAP is nicely constructed. All things considered, I would not assume that, if she has an
active bacterial infection, it is due to a particularly sensitive organism. Indeed, the empiric antibiotic that was chosen,
Zosyn, is quite broad in spectrum of coverage.
36. In your section on "Possible COPD exacerbation" it would have been more complete to include at least a
measurement of her FEV 1.0 as a baseline to see whether she would be a candidate for bronchodilators, either systemic
or inhaled, and to follow her for improvement or deterioration in an objective way.
37. Given your mention of a chest CTA showing "extensive bilateral PEs", I am quite surprised that pulmonary embolism is
not part of your discussion of chest pain in the Assessment/Plan section.
38. This patient is significantly anemic, but you did not mention it in your Assessment/Plan sections. Especially given her
difficulties with oxygenation, anemia will definitely aggravate her symptoms and worsen her prognosis. Unfortunately,
many doctors do not look for a cause of anemia, but, in my opinion, this should always be done.
39. I am delighted that you did not use "denied" anywhere in this document. Keep up this good practice.
Joshua, while there are several good points about this H&P as you have written it, I am very concerned that your focus is
too narrow (e.g., not mentioning the potential importance of pulmonary embolism in this scenario). Also, it is very
important not to contradict yourself or omit what might be very significant findings (the premature ventricular beats on the
EKG would have been noticeable when taking the pulse if the pulse was taken by actually feeling the artery). Please be
aware that a medical record is a legal document that sometimes may have to withstand significant legal scrutiny, so you
want to be sure that (a) it is complete enough and (b) there is nothing in it that might be interpreted as contradicting
something else in it. (For example, you mention that she can speak in complete sentences and you don't describe shallow
respirations, but you mention "poor air movement found on exam".) It is hard for me to ignore the CTA findings that you
said showed extensive pulmonary emboli. Is she so very sedentary at home? Or might she have an underlying
predisposition to clotting, such as an occult malignancy. You mentioned an abnormality on the chest x-ray, (left perihilar
opacity) and, clearly, one of the malignancies that can be associated with a tendency to deep vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism is lung cancer.
9/29/22, 2:52 PM Re: H&P week 3

This is a very difficult patient for someone at your level, given the extent and plurality of her acute problems. On the other
hand, we seldom have the luxury of having a patient with only one active problem, especially those in the ninth decade of
life as this patient is. In many ways you rose to this challenge nicely, but there are several areas for improvement.
I hope you will not be daunted by the extent of my suggestions. I know that you will be able to apply them to your
subsequent work and that your next effort with show the improvement of which I know you are capable.
Sincerely,
