
First, I appreciate your getting the H&P to me at a time that uncomplicates my timing of reviewing it (Wednesday evening).
Second, this is by far the very best H&P you have submitted up to now and I am absolutely delighted with the progress that
you have made and are continuing to make. You have obviously put a lot of effort into this.
My specific comments as as follows:
1. Your identification of the husband as informant is well stated, as is the reason that the patient is not a reliable
informant.
2. I commend you for stating the duration of the chief complaint.
3. Your rendition of the HPI is superb. You have given the reader information that makes it clear what the patient's
baseline status is and how that has been affected by the elements of the HPI. It is EXCELLENT that you indicate that
when it began she was in her "usual state of health". Although the duration of the actual present illness is relatively short,
you have composed a well-focused, succinct, yet appropriately detailed and chronological narrative.
4. In the ROS it is possible that the absence of headache or weight change might belong in the HPI.
5. I COMMEND YOU FOR AVOIDING THE WORD "DENIES"!!!!!
6. In the surgical history it would be more complete to state, if known, the reason for the hysterectomy.
7. In the family history, it is more complete to include the ages of individuals listed and whether they are alive or dead.
Also, children are appropriately part of the family history.
8. In the social history you appropriately state that the patient is retired. It would be more complete to include her work
history. Sometimes (although not in this case) the work history provides clues regarding the nature of the present illness.
9. Especially given her history of atrial fibrillation, it would be appropriate to describe the heart rhythm with the heart rate
in the vital signs. This is a convention in several textbooks of physical diagnosis.
10, When a patient is in atrial fibrillation, it is very important to record the heart rate at the cardiac apex as well as at a
peripheral pulse. In atrial fibrillation these differ because some of the systoles are so close together that the ventricle is not
full enough to have a stroke volume that can be felt in the periphery. In fact, when present, an irregularly irregular rhythm
with a pulse deficit of at least 10 is pathognomonic of atrial fibrillation. You may need to know this if you are in a situation
where monitoring or EKG is not available. I am telling you this not only because it will make you a better physical
diagnostician, but also because I want you to feel peripheral pulses not only for their amplitude but also because they give
you an idea of the cardiac rhythm to supplement what you hear in the chest.
11. Please, please get in the habit of percussing chests. It takes only a few seconds and can sometimes give you critically
important information.
12. Please, please measure the liver span and report it. Just saying that there is not hepatosplenomegaly is not
informative enough.
13. I commend you for using the word "tenderness" to indicate pain when you touch the patient. As you evidently know,
"tenderness" is a sign (what we elicit) and "pain" is a symptom (what the patient reports).
14. One of the tests that is terribly neglected is the gram stain. With this patient, with a relatively low number of WBC in
her urine, a gram stain of a few drops of non-centrifuged urine, if it shows organisms, is highly correlated with organism
counts of greater than 100,000 per ml, which is one of the criteria for a urinary tract infection. Also, the gram stain, if
positive, will tell you instantly, some very important information about what organisms have to be covered by the initial
antibiotics. You suggested empirically giving the patient ceftriaxone. That would not cover enterococcus, which can
certainly cause urinary tract infection. But if the gram stain showed gram-positive cocci in chains, then you might not want
to depend on ceftriaxone alone for coverage. Among doctors, this is sort of a "generational" thing, but, trust me, gram
stains are still very useful.
15. Your Assessment and Plan are, as usual, very good and well written and thought-out.
16. One line of evidence going against hepatic insufficiency as a cause of the change in mental status is the normal INR.
That is a very sensitive and useful liver function test. The transaminases are really tests of liver status or injury but not
liver function. The liver has four functions: synthesis (albumin and clotting factors), degradation (ammonia level),
excretion (bilirubin) and storage (e.g., iron). The transaminases do not measure any of these functions. I am only telling
you this because it is common to use the words "liver function tests" very glibly and, usually, inappropriately.
Joshua, as indicated by the largely laudatory comments above, you have made ENORMOUS progress in the last few
weeks, after starting from a point where much improvement was needed. With what is clearly huge amounts of effort you
have risen to a wonderful level and I am sure that you will continue to grow and grow into the excellent clinician that you
are meant to be. I look forward to your sixth H&P.
10/13/22, 10:16 AM Re: week 5 H&P

