Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm

Internal Medicine History and Physical Examination – Week 2
Patient Name: Mr. C
Date: 8/6/2022
Referral Source: Emergency Department Consult
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Subjective 
CHIEF COMPLAINT:
"I had a black stool this morning then collapsed on the floor."
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS:
Mr. C is a 72-year-old male with a past medical history of GI bleeds, hypertension, hyperlipidemia and 
cholelithiasis (6/22) who was in apparent good health until 20 years ago when he had his first episode of 
black bowel movement. Patient subsequently presented to ED and was found to have Hb of 4.2. Patient 
received blood transfusion, unknown number of units received. EGD and colonoscopy were reportedly 
negative, no source of GI bleed identified at the time. Patient was prescribed Dexilant for reflux, which 
he does not take. Patient's second episode of GI bleed occurred 5 years ago where he presented with 
black bowel movement. Patient does not recall his hemoglobin at the time but did not receive any blood 
transfusions during hospitalization. Patient was found to have a "smaller lower esophageal sphincter" 
and EGD was unable to be complete, colonoscopy was not performed at the time. Patient's most recent 
colonoscopy 6 years ago was reportedly normal, repeat in 5 years.
Today, patient presents to ED after an episode of 1 black bowel movement with a subsequent near 
syncopal episode. Patient did not have associated abdominal or rectal pain, bright red blood in stool, or 
blood in toilet bowl. Patient describes dizziness, lightheadedness and diffuse weakness immediately 
after the bowel movement which caused him to lower himself on the floor. Patient did not have loss of 
consciousness, head trauma, vertigo or orthostatic symptoms. Patient notes mild occasional reflux but 
does not take medications for symptoms. He does not use NSAIDs or blood thinners.
Patient was recently admitted to Morristown for nausea, vomiting and weight loss of 50 lbs over 2 
months and was found to have choledocholithiasis. His hospital course was complicated by diarrhea in 
which PCR C diff was positive but toxin was negative. Patient was treated with vancomycin with 
resolution of symptoms. He underwent ERCP 6/2022 and has gained 10 lbs since then. No other recent 
surgeries or procedures reported. Planning outpatient cholecystectomy. 
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:
Hypertension - Maintained on Olmesartan-Hydrochlorothiazide 40-15 mg QD and Atenolol 50 mg QD.
Hyperlipidemia - Maintained on Ezetimibe 10 mg QD and Fenofibrate 10 mg QD.
GI bleed x2 - most recent 5 years ago: no transfusion required, no source of GI bleed identified. 
Choledocholithiasis - onset 3/2022, ERCP 6/2022.
PAST SURGICAL HISTORY:
Left shoulder and neck surgery for bulged disc - 2014
Right shoulder surgery
ERCP - 6/2022
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Patient is married and lives at home with his wife. Feels safe in home and relationship. 
Patient is currently employed as professional engineer. 
Patient is former smoker with 15 pack year history, quit 45 years ago. 
Patient drinks 1 alcoholic beverage per week. 
Patient does not use recreational drugs.
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
FAMILY HISTORY:
Father is deceased, had history of lung cancer secondary to asbestos exposure. 
Mother is deceased, had history of hypertension. 
Patient has 1 son who is alive and well. 
Remaining family history noncontributory.
HOME MEDICATIONS
Alprazolam (Xanax) 0.25 mg QD 
Atenolol 50 mg QD 
Choline Fenofibrate 135 mg QD 
Ezetimibe 10 mg QD 
Omlesartan-Hydrochlorothiazide 40-25 mg QD
Oxycodone-Acetaminophen 10-325 mg Q6H prn for pain
ALLERGIES:
Tetracyclines – causes anaphylaxis 
ROS:
Constitutional: + general weakness, change in weight (50 lbs over 2 months during episode of 
choledocholithiasis, gained 10 lbs since ERCP 6/2022). No recent fever, chills, diaphoresis, night sweats. 
HEENT: + Lightheadedness. No recent trauma, LOC, headache, confusion, changes in vision, vertigo, 
tinnitus.
Resp: No shortness of breath, cough, sputum production, hemoptysis, wheezing reported. 
CV: No chest pain, palpitations, claudication, dyspnea on exertion reported. 
GI: + melena. No abdominal pain, reflux, constipation, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hematochezia
reported. 
GU: No dysuria, urgency, frequency, incontinence reported. 
Heme/Lymph: No bruising, petechia, purpura reported. No lymphadenopathy reported. 
Neuro: + near-syncope, neuropathic pain right arm radiating to 4th and 5th finger. No neck stiffness, 
change in sensation, numbness, tingling, focal weakness reported. 
Psych: No mood changes, anxiety, depression erported. 
Musculoskeletal: Joint pain bilateral shoulders.
Skin: No rashes, sores reported. 
 
Objective
VITALS:
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) -
Temp: [36.7 °C (98 °F)] 36.7 °C (98 °F)
Heart Rate: [69-71] 69; (regular rhythm, normal rate)
Resp: [15-18] 18
BP: (100-155)/(49-62) 155/62
SpO2: [97 %-100 %] 100 %
Height -
Weight - 
There is no height or weight on file to calculate BMI.
No intake/output data recorded.
I/O this shift:
In: 1000 [IV Piggyback:1000]
Out: -
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
PHYSICAL EXAM:
General appearance: Patient is well developed and nourished. Patient is not in apparent distress. 
HEENT: No scalp lesions. Pupils equal/round, reactive to light. Visual fields and extraocular muscles 
intact. No conjunctival pallor. Normal hearing bilaterally and tympanic membrane. No sinus tenderness. 
Trachea midline. No thyroid gland enlargement or nodules. No carotid bruits. No lymphadenopathy.
Cardiac: Regular rhythm, normal rate. 2/6 systolic murmur at LUSB. No rubs or gallops. PMI is nondisplaced. 
Lungs: Clear to auscultation, wheezes or crackles. Normal tactile fremitus and percussion of lung fields. 
Abdomen: Active bowel sounds. Abdomen is soft, non-tender, non-distended. No aortic or renal bruits. 
No hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. 
Extremities: Normal radial and distal pulses. No lower extremity edema.
Skin: Warm and dry. 
Neuro: Alert and oriented. Cranial nerves intact. Sensory and proprioception intact. Muscle strength 
5/5 bilaterally in upper and lower extremities. No pronator drift. Cerebellar function intact.
LAB:
Recent Labs
Lab Units 08/06/22
1517
08/06/22
1050
WBC AUTO 10*3/uL -- 9.88
HEMOGLOBIN g/dL 7.5* 8.5*
HEMATOCRIT % 24.4* 27.1*
PLATELETS 
AUTO
10*3/uL -- 261
Recent Labs
Lab Units 08/06/22
1050
SODIUM mmol/L 139
POTASSIUM mmol/L 4.80
CHLORIDE mmol/L 106
CO2 mmol/L 21.2*
BUN mg/dL 58*
CREATININE mg/dL 1.0
CALCIUM mg/dL 9.3
TOTAL PROTEIN g/dL 5.3*
BILIRUBIN 
TOTAL
mg/dL 0.2
ALK PHOS U/L 25*
ALT U/L 9*
AST U/L 19
GLUCOSE mg/dL 102*
Lab Units 08/06/22
1050
ALT U/L 9*
AST U/L 19
ALK PHOS U/L 25*
ALBUMIN g/dL 3.4*
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
INR 1.06
IMAGING, AND OTHER STUDIES:
CT Abdomen Pelvis With and Without Contrast
Narrative: EXAM: CT ABDOMEN PELVIS W WO 
CONTRAST
CLINICAL INDICATION: GI bleed;72 y.o.male?who 
reports?one day history of melena and 
hematochezia, which started?abruptly?this 
morning.?Patient had episode of lightheadedness 
and near syncope after a bowel movement this 
morning. Patient has history of previous GI 
bleeding, but a source was not identified on 
colonoscopy or endoscopy at that time. Patient 
does not take anticoagulation. Patient reported an 
ERCP 6 weeks ago
TECHNIQUE: Axial CT images of the abdomen and 
pelvis were obtained before and after the 
administration of intravenous contrast. Sagittal and 
coronal reconstructions were performed. CT was 
performed using one or more dose reduction 
techniques including automated exposure control, 
adjustment of the mA and/or kV according to 
patient size, and/or use of iterative reconstruction 
technique.
IV Contrast: Intravenous contrast was administered.
Oral Contrast: Oral contrast was not administered. 
COMPARISON: CT abdomen pelvis 11/10/2018
Count of known CT scans and NM Myocardial 
Perfusion studies in last 12 months (Quality 
Measure G9321): None
FINDINGS:
Lung Bases: Within normal limits.
Liver: Within normal limits. 
Biliary System: Cholelithiasis. Pneumobilia with air 
in the common bile duct extending into the bilateral 
intrahepatic bile ducts, postprocedural from ERCP.
Hepatic Vasculature: The hepatic veins and portal 
veins are patent.
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
Spleen: Within normal limits.
Pancreas: Within normal limits.
Adrenal Glands: No focal mass lesion.
Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder: Within normal limits.
Lymph nodes: Within normal limits.
Aorta/Retroperitoneum: Aortic atherosclerosis 
without aneurysmal dilatation.
Bowel: Diverticulosis is noted without CT evidence 
of diverticulitis.
Pelvic Organs: Within normal limits.
Abdominal/Pelvic Wall: Within normal limits.
Ascites: No evidence of ascites.
Osseous Structures: No significant abnormality.
Other Findings: No other significant findings are 
noted.
Impression: No active extravasation within the 
bowel lumen to suggest gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage.
Images and Interpretation/Procedure Reviewed by: 
Levi Sokol MD
FINAL RESULT BY: Levi Sokol MD DICTATED: 
8/6/2022 1:21 PM
XR Chest 1 View
Narrative: EXAM: XR CHEST 1 VIEW
CLINICAL INDICATION: GI bleed;
TECHNIQUE: A single view of the chest was 
obtained.
COMPARISON: 05/23/22.
Impression: Postsurgical changes/Catheters and 
Support Devices:
Prior cervical spine surgery 
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
Lungs/Pleural Spaces:
Normal
Heart/Mediastinum:
Within normal limits. 
Other:
Probable prior Mumford procedures.
Summary:
No active cardiopulmonary disease.
FINAL RESULT BY: Robert E Epstein MD DICTATED: 
8/6/2022 12:04 PM
Encounter Date: 08/06/22
ECG 12 lead
Result Value
Ventricular Rate 71
Atrial Rate 71
PR Interval 140
QRSD Interval 80
QT Interval 372
QTC Calculation 404
P Axis 54
R Axis 67
T Axis 19
Impression
NORMAL SINUS RHYTHM
NORMAL ECG
WHEN COMPARED WITH ECG OF 09-NOV-2018 
11:58,
NO SIGNIFICANT CHANGE WAS FOUND
Confirmed by Patti, Laryssa A (1882) on 8/6/2022 
2:08:36 PM
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
Mr. C is a 72 year-old male with a past medical history of 2 prior GI bleeds (most recent 
11/2018), hypertension, hyperlipidemia and cholelithiasis (s/p ERCP 6/22) who presents after an 
episode of melena and subsequent near syncopal episode this morning. Labs significant for Hb 7.5 
(decreased from 8.5 this morning, down-trended from 9.4 to 8.2 in 6/2022). Frequent PVCs noted on 
telemetry, normal EKG. Recently underwent ERCP for choledocholithiasis, OP cholecystectomy planned. 
EGD on 06/2022 showed esophagitis, gastritis, duodenal stricture, and superficial nonbleeding 
duodenal ulcers.
#Melena with anemia
Prior history of 2 episodes of melena: 1st episode Hb 4.2 requiring transfusion and no source of bleed 
identified, 2nd episode in 11/2018 did not require transfusion and no source of bleed identified. Most 
recent EGD from 6/2022 showed esophagitis, gastritis, duodenal stricture s/p balloon dilation and 
superficial nonbleeding duodenal ulcers- H. pylori negative, biopsy normal. s/p ERCP with 
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
sphincterotomy and stone extraction 6/14/2022- Hb on admission was 7.5, Hb upon discharge 6/15/22 
was 8.2. Most recent colonoscopy 6 years ago reportedly normal. Hb is 7.5, patient is hemodynamically 
stable. 
Given results of most recent EGD in 6/2022, patient presentation most concerning for upper GI bleed 
such as bleeding ulcer or gastritis. Malignancy likely although patient attributes recent weight loss to 
anorexia and nausea 2/2 choledocholithiasis. Esophageal varices unlikely as patient does not have prior 
history of liver disease or significant alcohol intake. Lower GI bleed unlikely as patient does not report 
hematochezia. 
- Will consult GI for EGD to evaluate source of GI bleed. Appreciate GI recommendations. 
- If no source of upper GI bleed identified, will proceed with colonoscopy. 
- Will proceed with high-dose IV PPI prior to EGD to decrease need for treatment of active bleeding 
during EGD. 
- Patient is currently hemodynamically stable. Continue to trend CBC. If Hb > 7, will proceed with 
transfusion. Will pre-emptively consent patient for blood transfusion. 
- Will assess coagulation status with PT/PTT/INR. Will correct coagulopathy if labs not within normal 
limits. 
#Dizzness/Lightheadedness/Near Syncopal Episode
Patient describes dizziness, lightheadedness and diffuse weakness immediately after the bowel 
movement, but no LOC, orthostatic symptoms or vertigo. 3/6 systolic murmur at LUSB and PVCs noted 
on telemetry, normal EKG. Given patient presentation and timing of symptoms, most concerning for 
vasovagal syncope vs arrhythmia. Acute blood loss unlikely as patient is hemodynamically stable and Hb 
upon discharge 6/2022 was 8.2. Other differentials including hypoglycemia, orthostatic hypotension or 
seizures unlikely as glucose within normal limit and patient did not report LOC or orthostatic symptoms. 
- Repeat EKG to evaluate for arrhythmia. Continue telemetry. 
- Proceed with echo to evaluate for cardiac related near syncopal episode. 
#Hypertension
Maintained on Olmesartan-Hydrochlorothiazide 40-15 mg QD and Atenolol 50 mg QD.
- Continue home regimen. 
#Hyperlipidemia
Hyperlipidemia - Maintained on Ezetimibe 10 mg QD and Fenofibrate 10 mg QD.
- Continue home regimen. 
#Chronic Pain in Forearms
Ongoing neuropathic pain in right forearm radiating to 4th and 5th fingers which he attributes to 
iatrogenic injury during blood draw many years prior. He also has ongoing bilateral shoulder pain, s/p 
bilateral shoulder surgery. He is maintained on Oxycodone-Acetaminophen 10-325 mg as needed for 
pain.
- Continue home regimen. 
Submitted Wed 8/10 8:48 pm
EBM:
 Overall objective of this study was to assess the clinical effectiveness of PPI treatment initiated 
prior to endoscopy in patients with acute upper GI bleeding. 
 Patient population: Patients admitted to the hospital with upper GI bleed or inpatients who 
developed upper GI bleed during hospital course.
o my patient was admitted into the hospital after 1 episode of melena in the AM – met 
inclusion criteria
 Intervention: IV or PO proton pump inhibitor prior to endoscopy
 Control: placebo, H2RA or no treatment prior to endoscopy 
 Outcomes: primary - death occurring within 30 day of acute bleed; secondary – rebleeding 
within 30 days, surgery for continued or recurrent bleeding within 30 days, length of hospital 
stay, transfusion requirements, proportion of participants with high-risk stigmata at the time of 
endoscopy, proportion of participants receiving endoscopic treatment at index endoscopy
 In summary, this meta-analysis found that in patients with upper GI bleed, initiation of PPI prior 
to endoscopy may reduce the proportion of patients that present with active bleeding, nonbleeding visible vessels or adherent clots (aka stigmata of recent hemorrhage) subsequently 
reducing the need for hemostatic treatment during endoscopy. However, initiation of PPI prior 
to EGD does not improve mortality, rebleeding or need for surgery. 
 As my patient fits inclusion criteria of the studies used within this metanalysis, will use outcomes 
to guide treatment plan for this patient. Will proceed with PPI prior to my patient’s endoscopy 
in order to decrease the need for further intervention/treatment during endoscopy, such as 
injecting medications, cauterizing blood vessels, etc. Intervention itself carries a risk, such as 
bleeding. As patient is anemia (although stable), want to avoid further bleeding and subsequent 
requirement of transfusions. 