,
Before I begin my "usual" note, I want to make sure you saw my text regarding HIPAA. You mentioned this patient's name
twice in your write-up, and I ask that you please avoid doing this in any unsecured medium and outside the actual care of
the patient. I am sure it was an oversight on your part, but now is the time to become cognizant of the requirements for
patients' privacy.
As I have come to expect, this H&P was excellent and has many strengths. My comments will be relatively few.
1. I commend you for indicating the informant and her reliability as a historian.
2. It might have been more complete to state, with the chief complaint, when it occurred (i.e., how long before you saw
her),
3. The HPI is written excellently, with great clarity and attention to chronology. The one suggestion I have is that the
word "dizzy" can be ambiguous. You appropriately used "lightheaded" and I have assumed that in this instance, by
"dizzy", you meant vertiginous. It would be a little clearer to specify what is meant by "dizzy" as it can be interpreted to
mean lightheaded or vertiginous.
4. In the Past Surgical History it would be more complete to indicate the reason for the hysterectomy.
5. In the Family History, it would be more complete to include the daughter's age and also any siblings of the patient.
6. In the ROS, you did use "denies" several times. But I commend you for spelling "pruritus" correctly and for referring to
the HPI without repeating information.
7. The heart rate of 67 in the vitals is a prime number. Did it come from a monitor?
8. I commend you for doing orthostatic heart rate and blood pressure. This is often omitted when it should be done.
Bravissima to you!!!!
9. Your Assessment and Plan meet your very high standard of excellence. It is very complete, articulately written, and
very appropriate.
Emma, I continue to be impressed by the quality of your work, by the way you have incorporated constructive suggestions
into your work, and by your overall caring approach to patients. I am eager to see your next H&P and, also, to see you in
person at next Monday's Clinical Challenge session.
Have a great weekend.
