
This is among the best first H&P's I have seen in many years! It is extremely good. I do have several comments,
but these are more for growth and polish and please do not let them discourage you.
1. It is generally best not to put the patient's name on the document you send me. I have saved it in my Vaishnavi
Warrier folder without the name. It is not possible to comply with HIPAA with ordinary email. The RRWJMS email is
believed to be secure, but, for various reasons, for this specific purpose, I prefer not to use it.
2. I commend you for including the reliability of the informant. You may be the first student I have had do this
on the first H&P!
3. There is some debate regarding whether the range of the brown recluse spider extends to NJ. I have attached some
references about necrotic arachnidism and one of them has a map of the range. It sounds like he actually saw the spider,
but it would be more convincing to me if you explicitly stated that he saw the spider.
4. Your description of the clinical evolution of this lesion is outstanding.
5. Ideally you should use the moment of admission as the point of reference for every event in the HPI. That way, no
matter when the document is read, the reader can reconstruct the chronology precisely. For this reason it is better not to
use a day of the week as a reference point, as you did with the onset of the GI-based episode. Looking at the whole
document, I conclude that this began the day after the presumed spider bite. Be aware that some severe group A strep
cellulitis episodes are accompanied by GI symptoms, especially diarrhea.
6. Let me commend you for not saying "deny" or "admit" or "claim" or "endorse" anywhere in this document.
7. The one general suggestion I have is that it is a good practice to begin the HPI with a statement of the patient's
underlying health, to the extent that he/she is aware of it. Something like "A 58 year-old man who was apparently well
until..." If wellness does not precede the chief complaint, then there are various alternatives, such as "...with a prior history
of COPD..." But if the prior history is at all relevant to the chief complaint, then that is where you would begin the HPI. For
example, if the chief complaint is hemoptysis, almost always the history would begin with the smoking history, present or
absent. My approach to this example is "A 55 year-old man who was well at age 15 when he began to smoke cigarettes,
one pack per day until the present..." and then summarize the cardiopulmonary history and events leading up to the
episode(s) of hemoptysis.
8. For the family history, you really should try to elicit parents, living or dead, and siblings and children, if any, with
illnesses and causes of death, if applicable. Also, there is a small litany of illnesses that may run in families that you can
ask about, including heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, arthritis, tuberculosis, and cancer.
9. It is always relevant to give the occupational history. (Many students list this as "retired" when that is the case; but
"retired" is not an occupational history, it is a current status.)
10. Several things you give in the system review are really part of the HPI and need not be repeated. For the other items,
you can say "...in addition to what is in the HPI, ..."
11. For the heart rate, I personally like to give the rhythm right up front with the heart rate in the vital signs: regular (all you
can really say) or irregular (and a pattern to the irregularity, if one is present). By the way, the heart rate of 121 MUST
have come from a monitor, because its only factors are 11 and 11, and I don't know anyone who takes a pulse for 11
seconds ;=).
12. For some of us, 58 does not define an "older" man. ;=)
13. Your giving the dimension of the lesion on the neck is excellent, and you have described it excellently. Was
there any evidence of necrosis (which would lend credence to the idea that this was the result of a spider bite)?
14. In the abdomen, you should support "no organomegaly" by giving the liver span.
15. I have never seen the blood pressure listed under the EKG reading.
16. Your discussion of the presumed spider bite is excellent. It might have been more correct to use "skin
abscess" as the heading; but that does not take away from the overall excellence of the discussion.
17. I'm not sure why you mentioned toxic shock syndrome in the differential diagnosis, as this patient does not meet
criteria for that clinical entity.
18. It would have been good to say more about the elevated lactate level. That is not just from ketoacidosis, and it may
be related to the severity of this infection.
19. Especially in this instance, it would have been a good idea to discuss the patient's long-term management and the
urgency of his having a physician who will follow him over the years to come.
this is an excellent first effort. If you had included one or two literature references in your discussion,
you would immediately be the "Educator" in the RIME assessment.
9/30/2020 Re: H&P meeting this week 09/29-10/03
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
I will reach out to you very soon to see about your presenting this patient. You may want to incorporate a couple of these
suggestions into your presentation.
