
I am glad to hear that your time at Somerset has gotten off to a good start. When I had my M3 medicine clerkship, the
clerkship was 12 weeks and in two hospitals (the Jewish Hospital of Saint Louis and the Saint Louis Veterans
Administration Hospital) and it was very valuable to experience medicine in two settings that were quite different, with
completely different patient populations. (I have a prejudice in favor of Veterans Hospitals as teaching sites, having spent
six months of my PGY-3 year the one in Minneapolis.)
As I mentioned yesterday, I am very happy that you sent me this write-up relatively early on Wednesday, which made it
much easier for me to plan my own time in responding. This write-up has many strengths and shows nice growth
compared to your first three write-ups, which themselves were quite strong and showed consistent improvement. My
"usual" comments follow:
1. I am delighted that you indicated the informant and the informant's reliability up front and concisely.
2. It is excellent that you state the duration of the chief complaint right up front. The one addition that might have made it
even stronger would be to say how long prior to admission the event of the chief complaint occurred. The interval between
the event of the chief complaint and the patient's appearance in the ED (or doctor's office) can sometimes be very helpful
in forming the differential diagnosis and/or interpreting the physical findings on exam.
3. In introducing the HPI, it is not necessary to repeat the chief complaint. It is useful, however, to include, in addition to
the patient's demographic, the baseline state of health when the present illness (not necessarily the chief complaint)
began. There are various ways you can do this, depending on the specific circumstances:
a. "He was in his usual state of apparent good health..."
b. "He was in a stable state of health, with well-controlled hypertension...(or whatever other underlying diseases may
have been present)"
c. "He is a 68 year-old man with prior history of hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and myocardial infarction requiring
stents but was feeling well when, one week prior to admission, he began to have episodes of numbness (and then
describe these episodes, including their frequency...)
And there are many other possible ways to do this.
4. Did the co-worker somehow notice the numbness or did the co-worker note some sort of facial asymmetry or actual
weakness of a limb? I'm not sure what numbness looks like.
5. I commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in your write-up. Bravo!
6. The absence of diabetes or seizure history, which you included in the PMH, would be fine to put in the HPI, as these
are relevant to the system involved.
7. It is excellent that you included the medications, and that he has not been taking them. This tells us a lot. This may
have been appropriate to put into the HPI also, as his non-adherence raises the risk of a TIA.
8. I am a little surprised that you did not include a category of family history. It is an integral part of a hospital admission
note.
9. For his work history, it would be more complete to indicate what his job was at Home Depot, as some may involve
toxic exposures.
10. In the physical exam, I commend you for using "regular" for the rhythm and a different descriptive ("normal") for the
rate. Many, many of your peers call the rate regular, which is not an accurate use of that term.
11. You know how I feel about percussing the chest. Please include this in your exam.
12. The palpability of the liver edge doesn't really tell us its size. Please include reporting the liver span, as that tells us
more meaningful information.
13. In describing the reflexes, "symmetrical" is a useful term. In fact, for many parts of the neuro exam this is a useful
term, if it applies.
14. It is nice to include the total protein in the chemistries; it would be more complete and more useful also to include the
albumin, partly because it is not possible to interpret the calcium level without including the simultaneous albumin level.
15. I wouldn't worry about the slightly elevated glucose, as it is probably not a fasting value.
16. As you have caused me to expect by consistent excellence, your A/P section is superb. (But in discussing the value
of the MRI, you say "distill" when you may have meant "distinguish".
16a. This patient might benefit from ambulatory monitoring of his cardiac rhythm, although not everyone with a TIA
needs that to be done.
17. Your EBM and the way you discussed what you found are outstanding.
11/17/22, 9:55 AM Re: H&P 4
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
you have continued to show wonderful growth and improvement, having started from a very good level of
excellence. I am eager to see the next two write-ups. If you can get the next one to me even earlier in the week, because
of Thanksgiving, it will make it a little easier for me to get my comments to you at a good time.
Have a great experience at Somerset.
Respectfully,
