
History obtained from patient who appears to be a reliable source
CC: 1 day chest pressure and hemoptysis
HPI: Patient is a 44y y/o m w/ PMHx of recent Achilles tendon repair (2/11/22) who presents with 
1 day of chest pressure and hemoptysis. Patient was in his usual state of health prior to the 
aforementioned symptoms and those outlined below. 4 weeks PTA, he had a left achilles tendon 
repair ), for which he was placed in a below knee solid cast. Since the 
procedure, he has been spending most of the day recumbent in bed. He was on ASA 324mg for 
anticoagulation post procedure which he has taken daily and Motrin 600mg for pain prn. 2 weeks 
PTA, he noticed intermittent swelling in his left anterior medical thigh just proximal to the knee, 
but no pain or erythema. The swelling was associated with occasional episodes of his L toes 
becoming cold with a blue appearance, both symptoms were alleviated with foot elevation. One 
week ago, he developed a non-bloody cough and then for the past 3 days began having tactile 
fevers and chills. Last night at around 6PM he began having constant squeezing L sided chest pain
with occasional radiation to the epigastrium or left shoulder described as a 6/10 in severity. The 
pressure is worse with deep breaths or laying on his left side. He did not try anything to relieve the 
pain. This AM, he had an episode of small volume hemoptysis while in the shower, and so he 
decided to come to the ED. The blood was described as minimally streaked when he intentionally 
brought up sputum. At no point has he had any SOB. Reports no current fever, chills, weight loss, 
fatigue, rashes, joint pains or swelling, palpitations, abd pain, N/V, constipation, or diarrhea. He is 
not vaccinated for covid and never tested positive, but he took an antibody test in November
which was positive. No other known recent infections. No recent sick contacts. No recent long 
distance travel. No known family histories of malignancy, recurrent 1st trimester pregnancy losses, 
hypercoagulable disorders, or DVTs/PEs. No similar symptoms in the past or history of DVT or PE.
ROS: Pertinent positives per HPI, ROS otherwise negative
PMHx:
Previous R foot fracture 20 years ago without need of surgical intervention
PSurgHx:
Achilles tendon repair (2/11/22)
Appendectomy (age 5)
Meds/herbs/supplements:
aspirin 324 mg – since procedure 2/11/22
Motrin 600mg PRN for pain since procedure, approximately 3 weekly.
Allergies:
No Known Allergies
FHx:
Mother- HTN, alive 79
Father- HTN, alive 81
No siblings or children
No known extended family history including grandparents and cousins of DVT/PE or 
hypercoagulable disorder

Social Hx:
Patient lives in South River with his wife. He owns his own construction business and works on 
new residential construction. He has never worked on older buildings. No known history of 
exposure to asbestos or silica. No tobacco, EtOH, drug use. His wife and he are very health 
conscious and go to the gym together 5 times weekly. Eats leafy greens with 2 meals daily.
Objective:
VITALS 
T: 99.7 Tmax: 99.7 
HR: 109 (109 - 109) – regular rhythm 
BP: 137/83 (137/83 - 137/83)
RR: 17 (17 - 17) and unlabored | SpO2: 97% (97% - 97%) on room air
General: Age appropriate male in NAD
HEENT: No lymphadenopathy appreciated. No tracheal deviation. No mucosal or conjunctival 
pallor. No nuchal rigidity. No erythema or exudates.
Chest: Tachycardic , no MGR, resonant to percussion
Lungs: Clear to auscultation bl, normal chest excursion, resonate to percussion
Abdominal: Liver approx 8cm on percussion (no free edge palpable), no splenomegaly appreciated, 
normal bowel sounds, tympanitic to percussion, no tenderness to palpation
Extremities: Left hard cast noted on the left foot with no signs of skin irritation around openings. 
Compared the right leg, on gross visual inspection, there is mild increased swelling extending from 
knee to the inguinal region. Circumference should have been measured. No pitting edema. No 
digital clubbing. No focal joint swelling. L leg evaluation limited secondary to cast.
Skin: No evidence of petechiae, purpura, or ecchymosis. 
Neuro: CN2-12 intact, 5/5 strength in all major muscle groups, A&Ox3
Psych: responding to questions appropriately
Labs:
LABS (last 24h) 
WBC: 11.8 / Hb: 13.4 / Hct: 38.5 / Plt: 238 
-- Diff: N:75.70% L:15.5% Mo:7.8% Eo:0.3% Baso:0.3%
PT: 13.6 / PTT: 29/ INR: 1.21 
137 | 101 | 11
--------------------< 106 Ca: 9.3 Mg: 1.9
4.1 | 27.4 | 0.8
Bands = 3
Trop: 6
Bnp: 18
Imaging:
CTA Chest W/Contrast- Severe bilateral pulmonary emboli as described with evidence of increased 
right-sided heart pressures. Bilateral lower lobe and inferior left upper lobe ground glass opacities, 
which may represent infection and/or pulmonary infarcts.
EKG (my read): NSR at 96 bpm, normal axis, no ST, T or Q wave abnormalities 
Gardner Ryan H&P 5 submitted 2022 03 17 (Thu) mid-pm
Assessment and Plan:
Patient is a 44y y/o m w/ PMHx of recent Achilles tendon repair (2/11/22) who presents with 1 day 
of chest pressure, and hemoptysis in the setting of recent immobility which was found to be a 
provoked PE. In the ED, vitals notable for tachycardia to 109. Labs are WNL. Imaging showing 
bilateral PE with evidence of increased right-sided heart pressures. EKG NSR, BNP and troponin
wnl. ED called for MICU screen and IR was consulted. Patient was determined to be 
hemodynamically stable for medical floors admission and IR determined he was not a candidate 
for endovascular intervention at this time. Hep gtt started.
#Large b/l PE
-1 day of chest pressure and hemoptysis, in the setting of recent immobility from Achilles tendon 
repair (2/11), was on ASA 324mg for AC
-CTA chest shows severe b/l PE with evidence of increased right-sided heart pressures. As well as 
b/l lower lobe and inferior left upper lobe ground glass opacities, which may represent infection 
and/or pulmonary infarcts
-EKG NSR, trop, BNP wnl
-No evidence of coagulopathy 
-PESI score 0
-Saturating appropriately on room air and no signs of hemodynamic compromise 
-Echo pending to further access cardiac function and LE duplex pending to access if there is still 
clots in legs
-Started on hep gtt started in case condition worsens and needs intervention. Will start on DOAC if 
remains stable.
-Cont to trend trop and BNP, if elevates or patient becomes hemodynamically unstable call MICU 
and IR for re-eval
#Leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance 
-Likely reactive to PE (well documented in literature) but will get respiratory panel. Exam not 
consistent with acute infection of oropharynx. Bands = 3
-Will continue to trend, if continues to elevate or accompanies fevers (which can also be seen with 
PE), will get blood culture.
#Achilles tendon repair
-Surgical repair on 2/11/22
-Plan for cast removal on 3/15, will consult ortho in AM for possible removal as inpatient
