
*History provided by patient herself who is a reliable historian
CC: shortness of breath for 2 hours
HPI: The patient is a 56-year-old female with a past medical history notable for PE, DVT 
(stopped taking Eliquis, 9 months prior to admission – June 2022), and HTN. She presented to 
the ED with sudden onset of shortness of breath, lightheadedness, and palpitations that began 2 
hours prior to admission. Patient was in the kitchen preparing breakfast when symptoms began.
She reports her symptoms are exacerbated by movement. She did not experience any other 
symptoms such as chest pain, cough, loss of consciousness, headaches, nausea, vomiting, fevers, 
or chills. She states that she has not had any pain in either of her legs or noticed any swelling. 
She has not travelled recently. She has not been sick recently and reports feeling like her normal 
self. Of note, the patient works as a social worker and states that some days she will sit for 14 
hours straight at work, which she has been doing more lately. She reports that in 2021 when she 
had a PE, she was sitting for long periods of time more frequently. Patient also states that she has 
not been to a doctor in a while. 
ED course: Patient was sitting in tripod position, tachypneic but only had mild increase in 
respiratory effort. Patient was found to have an acute saddle PE demonstrated on CTA with right 
heart strain revealed on bedside TTE. tPA was administered and patient experienced 
improvement in hemodynamics and respiratory status.
ROS:
CONSTITUTIONAL: no changes in weight, see HPI.
HENT: no changes in vision or hearing.
RESPIRATORY: see HPI
CV: see HPI
GI: see HPI
GU: no dysuria or urinary frequency.
MSK: no myalgia or joint pain.
SKIN: no rash or pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: see HPI.
PSYCHIATRIC: no recent changes in mood. No anxiety or depression.
PMHx:
DVT, PE, HTN, OSA
SurgHx:
No past surgery.
Meds:
Atorvastatin 40 mg qd
Gabapentin 300 mg BID
Lisinopril 5 mg qd
Allergies:
No known allergies to medications, food, latex, or environmental exposures.


SocHx:
Works as a social worker at Somerset hospital.
Patient reports that she has never smoked, used smokeless tobacco, or alcohol, or other drug use
such as marijuana, cocaine, and heroine.
FamHx:
No significant family history.
PE:
Vitals – Temp: 36.6 °C (97.8 °F), Heart Rate: 113, Resp: 20, BP: 132/82, SpO2: 99 %, RA; 110 
kg (242 lb); 1.702 m (5’7”); BMI 37.97
GENERAL: Patient is awake, alert, and oriented x3 and in no painful distress. Moving all 
extremities, not toxic-appearing. Calm and cooperative to treatment.
SKIN: Warm, dry; (-) cyanosis; (-) rash.
HEAD: Normocephalic: (-) scalp swelling, (-) tenderness.
EYES: PERRL, EOMI: (-) conjunctival pallor, (-) scleral icterus.
ENMT: Airway patent: (-) pharyngeal erythema (-) stridor, (+) mucous membranes moist.
NECK: Supple: (-) tenderness, (-) stiffness, (-) lymphadenopathy, (-) thyromegaly.
CHEST AND RESPIRATORY: Lungs clear: (-) rales, (-) rhonchi, (-) wheezes, (+) breath 
sounds equal bilaterally.
HEART AND CARDIOVASCULAR: Heart regular rate and rhythm: (-) irregularity; (-) 
murmur, (-) gallop.
ABDOMEN AND GI: Soft: (-) abdominal tenderness, (-) guarding, (-) rebound, (-) palpable 
masses.
BACK: (-) CVA tenderness, (-) midline tenderness.
VASCULAR: (+) distal pulses. 
EXTREMITIES: (-) deformity, (+) trace pedal edema bilaterally. 
NEURO AND PSYCH: Mental status as above. CNs: Pupils equal, round, reactive, EOMI, (-) 
nystagmus, (-) facial asymmetry. Tongue and uvula midline. Strength: Symmetric.
Labs:
WBC 13.09
Hb 13.9
Plt 274
Pro-BNP 1,270
Troponin of 69 -> 158 -> 211 -> 86 
COVID negative
Imaging:
CTA Chest w contrast –
Acute saddle pulmonary embolism and extension into all the segmental and subsegmental 
branches bilaterally with CT evidence of right heart strain. The largest clot burden is seen within 
the distal left main pulmonary artery
CXR –
No radiographic evidence of acute cardiopulmonary disease.


US Venous Doppler LE bilateral –
Summary: Right – there is an acute extensive DVT; Left: there is no evidence of deep or 
superficial venous thrombosis
The distal femoral, popliteal, gastrocnemius, posterior tibial, and peroneal veins show evidence 
of deep venous thrombosis with abnormal spontaneity, phasicity, augmentation, and 
compressibility. The distal femoral, popliteal, gastrocnemius, posterior tibial, and peroneal veins 
are non-compressible.
TEE w contrast –
The study was technically difficult with many images being suboptimal in quality. There is mild 
concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. Left ventricular systolic function is normal. The LV 
calculated ejection fraction (MOD Biplane Method) is 59%. The right ventricle is not well 
visualized. The right ventricle appears moderate to severely dilated. The right ventricular systolic 
function is mildly reduced. Right atrial pressure is elevated. RVSP not able to be calculated.
EKG report –
sinus tachycardia with occasional premature ventricular complexes; ventricular rate 127; atrial 
rate 127; PR interval 136; QT interval 98; QTc calculation 473
A/P:
The patient is a 56-year-old female with a past medical history notable for PE, DVT (stopped 
taking Eliquis, 9 months prior to admission – June 2022), and HTN who presented to the ED 
with acute onset shortness of breath where she was found to have a saddle PE with evidence of 
right heart strain. TPA administration provided significant improvement and she was then placed
on a heparin drip briefly and ultimately switched to Eliquis.
#Saddle PE with evidence of right heart strain
Due to patient’s presentation of sudden onset shortness of breath, palpitation, and 
lightheadedness with evidence of acute DVT on LE US, the number one diagnosis that needs to 
ruled out is pulmonary embolism given the acute nature of the disease process and severity of the 
consequences if not identified. With confirmation of saddle pulmonary embolus CTA chest, right 
heart strain (dilated right ventricle and akinesis with apical sparing suggestive of McConnell 
sign) on bedside TTE and elevated pro-BNP, and elevated troponins (submassive pulmonary 
embolism is the most likely diagnosis. Of note, patient’s Well’s score was 6 – for heart rate 
>100, previous PE/DVT, and PE being the number diagnosis. Patient responded well to tPA and 
is now tolerating Eliquis 10 mg which she will continue for BID for 7 days after which she will 
follow up with her outpatient hematologist. One risk factor for the development of this patient’s 
DVTs and subsequent PE is the sedentary nature of her work where she sits for 14 hours per day. 
We will counsel patient on importance of taking breaks to stand up and walk around to increase 
the circulation in her legs and prevent venous stasis, wearing compression stockings as well as 
elevating the legs if possible. Patient will need to follow up with her outpatient hematologist and 
potentially be on anticoagulation indefinitely.
Given that this is the patient’s second VTE event there is high index for suspicion of some sort of 
hypercoagulable state. The patient had a hypercoagulability workup with her outpatient 
hematologist done 1 year prior to admission which included prothrombin 20210GA mutation
(prothrombin mutation), Cardiolipin antibodies IgA, IgM, IgG (antiphospholipid syndrome), 
Beta-2 Glycoprotein antibodies IgM, IgA, IgG (antiphospholipid syndrome), Protein S Antigen, 
Antithrombin III antigen. The results for all tests were negative thus making inherited 


thrombophilias such as Prothrombin mutation, Protein S deficiency, Antithrombin III deficiency 
or acquired thrombophilias such as antiphospholipid syndrome less likely.
Furthermore, the patient mentioned that she has not seen a doctor for some time. For this reason 
it brings into question whether the patient is up to date on her cancer screenings and whether or 
not malignancy is leading to a hypercoagulable state. An appointment with general internal 
medicine at Rutgers Health was schedule for the patient for follow up where cancer screening 
can be assessed.
Obesity is another risk factor that puts this patient at risk for VTE. The patient was interested in 
information on exercise and diet and was provided print outs as well as a dietitian consult. Other 
risk factors for hypercoagulable states such as smoking, pregnancy, hormone replacement 
therapy, heparin-induced thrombophilia, recent surgery are less likely in this patient.
#Hypertension
Lisinopril was initially held due to the severe obstruction of blood flow to the lungs and concern 
hypotension. Once symptoms improved and PE was resolved, it was okay to restart 
antihypertensive medication. Patient’s blood pressure remained stable throughout hospital course 
and will be discharged on same dose of Lisinopril 5 mg and is recommended to check blood 
pressures at home and follow up with general internal medicine.
EBM
Clinical question: Why was tPA administered in this patient in the ED rather than just treating 
with anticoagulation?
Meyer G, et al. "Fibrinolysis for patients with intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism". The New 
England Journal of Medicine. 2014. 370(15):1402-1411.
P - >18 yo w/ PE onset of symptoms <15 days prior; w/ RV dysfunction; myocardial injury with 
elevated troponins; hemodynamically stable
I – Tenecteplase 30-50 mg IV
C – Placebo 
O – All-cause mortality or hemodynamic decompensation at 7 days
The PEITHO (pulmonary embolism thrombolysis) trial demonstrated that in patients with 
submassive PE being treated with heparin, thrombolysis with Tenecteplase reduces all-cause 
mortality at 7 days in comparison to placebo. TPA is standard treatment for acute massive PE 
however the benefit of tPA in those with submassive PE was less clear and thus this trial 
investigated its role. 1,005 patients with submassive PE – those that were hemodynamically 
stable with RV strain and elevated troponins – were randomized to receive Tenecteplase with 
unfractionated heparin or heparin without Tenecteplase. At seven days, the Tenecteplase group 
was associated with reduced all-cause mortality; however, Tenecteplase was associated with an 
increased risk of bleeding. Secondary outcomes demonstrated that the Tenecteplase group was 
also associated with decreased decompensation at seven days, recurrent PE at seven days, serious 
adverse events at 30 days, mechanical ventilation, and surgical embolectomy. In short, 
thrombolysis with Tenecteplase should be considered for treatment of submassive PE with right 
heart strain in patients without contraindications as thrombolytic agents carry the risk of 
bleeding.