Date - 3/18/21
Source- Patient, poor historian
CC- Increasing SOB for 1 week.  

HPI

Pt is a 71 YOM with PMH of CHF, CAD s/p 1 stent, cirrhosis, Insulin dependent DM, and A fib who is presenting with increased SOB for the past week, and generalized feelings of swelling of which he is frustrated he hasn't gotten better. The pt states that he has dyspnea on exertion which began Monday. He is able to walk with VNA assistance and a walker and noticed the difficulty breathing while walking. The pt is unable to walk more than a short distance and is unable to ambulate on stairs. The pt also states that he chronically has difficulty breathing while flat on his back which has gotten worse since Monday. He also regularly sleeps with his head elevated because of difficulty breathing as well, but that also worsened around Monday. Significantly his legs began “weeping” fluid 2 weeks ago. He has no pain on walking but noticed significant swelling of both his legs. The home VNA nurse began wrapping his legs with an omi-boot due to the weeping. He also noticed stomach bloating which began gradually starting 1 month ago. He stated that he has gained 100lbs in 2mo. He has used a home scale to measure his weight. The pt also has chronic back pain and R shoulder pain and is on oxycodone 5mg for the pain.

The pt states that he sees the home VNA due to past hospitalizations (most recent 4/2020) and difficulty with ambulation. The pt states that his VNA doctor changed his medications, and that they are not working and he is not taking all of them. It was difficult to assess which medications he was talking about and what regime he is currently on. 

ED course
In the ED the pt’s vitals were 130/65, HR 83, RR 18, Spo2 97% on 2L NC. Labs significant for Hgb 10.9, Tbili 1.9, Alk phos 167, troponin 0.02 and proBNP 1347. CXR showed hazy bilateral opacities which were consistent with effusion　
　
ROS
General-See HPI. No fever/chills, pt states he is cold, significant recent weight gain of 100lbs with no significant changes in diet or exercise. 
HEENT-No headache, blurry vision, no congestion, post-nasal drip, or runny nose. No changes in hearing acuity 
CV- No chest pain, palpitations, leg pain on walking
Resp- See HPI. No cough, wheezing. No SOB at the moment sitting on the bed. Dyspnea on exertion worse for the past 4 days
Abnl- No abdominal pain. Feels significantly bloated. No changes in bowel movements. Pt states he is normally constipated and has a bowel movement every 2-3 days. No blood in stool or diarrhea. No hematochezia. 
GI- No increased peeing, no increased thirst, no nocturia, no hematuria. No incontinence.
Neuro- Chronic neuropathic pain in bilateral lower extremities, at normal level of 5/10. No tingling, numbness or pain in bilateral upper and lower extremities
Endocrine- No polyuria or changes in thirst
MSK- chronic lower back pain of unknown etiology and R shoulder musculoskeletal pain associated with physical therapy injury. Pain is unchanged from baseline. No tremors or new weakness
Skin- See HPI. Pt states his legs are weeping, and are associated with increased swelling. No new rashes. 
Psych- Mildly depressed mood. Tearful because of pain and frustration over his condition. No suicidal ideation

Past Medical Hx- pt not able to recall much of his history, a chart review was performed from previous admission and VNA doctor was called. (unable to determine when chronic diagnoses were made)
Insulin dependent DM 
HTN 
HLD 
chronic back pain- “has been there for forever”
R shoulder pain- “from a PT injury months ago”
Hypothyroidism 
CVD s/p stent placement x1
Anasarca secondary to kidney disorder
US on 3/5/2021 consistent with cirrhosis, nodular liver contour, no ascites
US on 4/2020 admission moderate to large ascites. RUQ US hyperechoic hepatic steatosis, nodular liver contour. Enlarged IVC possible RHF
　
Surgical
R ankle replacement 2009
Cardiac Catheterization 2017
　
Medications
Unable to give his medications
In the ED Dr. _____ was reached and stated the pt was on Zaroxylyn-unsure dose
“Spironolactone caused thrombocytopenia in the past, Loop diuretics did not work”
Medications obtained from on-file VNA not all of the doses were obtained 
-Albuterol inhaler
-ASA 81
-Bumex 2mg BID
-Eliquis 5 BID
-Famotidine daily 
-Neurontin 300 Q6
-Humalog 8U TID, Lantus 30U BID
-synthroid 50mcg
-Nitrofurantoin
-Zofran
-Oxycodone 5mg q4h
-Flomax
-Tramadol 50 q8h
-Atorvastatin 40mg
　
Allergies
Shellfish- hives
Bacitracin- rash
　
Family history
Mother- heart disease and obesity passed away at age 82
Father- "cancer in back” passed away at 67
No siblings
Son- no health problems 
　
Social History 
-Lives at home with his wife (bus driver) and son
-Smoking 84 pack years. Quit in 2004
-No other drug use 
-Drank daily until he was 40 when he quit, unable to quantify daily amount prior to quitting
　
Vitals 
T: 97.2    HR: 80 regular  BP: 120/66   RR: 19  | SpO2: 97% on 2L NC  BMI: 66.8kg/m

Physical
General- Obese, appears stated age. Laying in bed in no acute distress. Able to mostly provide his own history but sometimes no coherent
HEENT- EOM intact, PERRL, anicteric, no cervical lymphadenopathy. No conjunctival pallor
CV- Normal S1, S2. No murmur, rubs or gallops. No evidence of JVD. No hepatojugular reflux. 
Resp- Unlabored respirations. Difficult to assess due to body habitus. Clear to auscultation bilaterally on the chest. Pt was able to and there were clear lung sounds on his R 
Abdominal- Distended abdomen. No pain on palpation. Gynecomastia present bilaterally. Unable to auscultate bowel sounds. Unable to assess fluid wave. No rash or spider angiomata. Difficult to assess due to body habitus. Not able to assess hepatomegaly or splenomegaly 
Extremities- 3+ pitting edema up to thighs, ACE bandages covering bilateral legs unable to palpate pulses. Pt able to move both lower extremities with pain, 4/5 strength. 5/5 strength of bilateral upper extremities. Unable to assess sensation due to coverage with ACE bandages. Unable to visualize feet to assess for ulcers. 
Skin- Old bruising on R forearm, no erythema  or spider angiomata. No jaundice, or cyanosis. 
Neuro- A/Ox3. CNII-XII grossly intact. No asterixis. No focal deficits appreciated. 
Psych- Mildly depressed affect, unable to answer all questions. No confusion. 
　
Labs:
137 | 96 | 24
--------------------< 119   Ca: 9.1 
3.7 | 27.4 | 0.8

WBC: 9.7 / Hb: 10.9 (baseline of last admission 11-12) / Hct: 35.1 / Plt: 208 / MVC 80.4
 Diff: N:75.9% L:14.8% Mo:7.6% Eo:0.8% Baso:0.9%
Troponin T: 0.02 
AST: 28 / ALT: 6 / AlkPhos: 167 / Bili: 1.5 / Dir: 0.5 / Prot: 6.7 / Alb: 3.8 
ProBNP: 1347* pg/mL　

03/18/202 CXR- Lungs and Pleural Spaces:
Hazy bibasilar opacities, right greater than left, which may represent layering effusions or may be secondary to a combination of body habitus and portable technique. No pneumothorax. There is pulmonary vascular congestion. Cardiomegaly present. 
　
EKG Rate 75BPM, P-R Interval 80ms, QRS Duration 80ms, Q-T Interval 358ms
QTC 399ms
Sinus rhythm w/ sinus arrhythmia short PR with occasional PVCs, LAD, Low voltage QRS

Summary Statement
Pt is a 71 YOM with a PMH of cirrhosis (multiple paracentesis), HTN, insulin dependent DM, A fib, possible CHF, CAD s/p stent placement x1, who presents with worsening dyspnea of 4 days, “weeping legs” for 2 weeks, and a 100lb weight gain over the last 2 months. On exam he was found to have 3+ pitting edema of the bilateral lower extremities, with concern for anasarca  due to CHF vs. worsening cirrhosis. 
　
　
Assessment 
　
1.	Anasarca 
a.	Pt is present with severe 3+  pitting edema of legs up to his thighs, associated with “weeping” that requires ACE bandages to be used by the VNA nurses. He also has been having SOB on exertion, and weight gain of 100lbs within the last few months associated with bloating. This suggests generalized swelling or anasarca. 
b.	Likely the anasarca is due to either acute on chronic heart failure vs. worsening cirrhosis. Could also be due to poor kidney function. Acute on chronic CHF is possible due to his past history of possible RHF seen on ultrasound with enlarged IVC indicative of “possible RHF.” This recent echo was his most recent and was done in 4/2020. It also showed normal LVEF and a right ventricle that was mildly dilated. CHF exacerbation could be causing SOB on exertion as well as leg edema, however the echo did not show any LV dysfunction therefore it is possible that he has no LV dysfunction and SOB would not then be expected. Acute exacerbation of CHF could be caused by ischemia however troponins are only 0.02 and EKG does not show ischemic changes. It could be due to medication non-adherence or diet high in salt. The pt stated that he had no changes in his diet but he also does not watch how he eats. Anasarca can also occur in the setting of worsening cirrhosis. The pt has a prior abdominal US that indicated nodular liver and hyperechoic hepatic steatosis consistent with cirrhosis. The pt has also had multiple paracentesis performed in the past. 
2.	Hx of Cirrhosis
a.	Pt does not have evidence of encephalopathy, does not have asterixis. It was difficult to assess whether or not there was a fluid wave present due to body habitus. Previous US in 4/2020 showed hepatic steatosis and nodular liver contour.  On a prior paracentesis there was some evidence of atypical cells however on further evaluation there was no suspicion of malignancy. On admission in 4/2020 a full liver work-up was done. The pt was found to be HepA non-immune, HepB non-immune, negative for alpha1-antitrypsin, negative for ceruloplasmin. Labs do not indicate any type of viral cause of hepatitis because one would expect to see more elevated LFTs. AST: 28 / ALT: 6 / AlkPhos: 167 / Bili: 1.5 / Dir: 0.5 / Prot: 6.7 / Alb: 3.8. Albumin is normal but there are no values for INR and PT available. 
3.	Normocytic anemia of unknown etiology  
a.	Pt has a Hgb of 10.8. On the previous hospitalization patient’s hgb was around 11-12. Potential causes include kidney disease which lead to decreased EPO production, however the patient’s Cr is not elevated to a level which would be expected in chronic kidney disease. Also possible could be anemia of chronic disease, or iron deficiency anemia. Anemia of chronic disease could have occurred in this patient due to cirrhosis or potentially CHF 
4.	Potential AKI
a.	Most likely prerenal due to third-spacing in the setting of anasarca. Cr 0.8, BUN 24. On last admission Cr was 0.8 and BUN 10-14. The slightly elevated BUN is concerning for possible kidney injury which could occur in third spacing due to hypovolemia. 
5.	Troponinemia 
a.	Pt had elevated troponins on admission to 0.02. This could indicate an MI but there is no evidence of ischemic changes on the EKG and troponins are only minorly elevated. More likely is demand ischemia in the setting of third-spacing which can cause hypovolemia. 
6.	Chronic home conditions
a.	A fib- Pt’s Afib is rate controlled and the pt is taking Eliquis 
b.	HTN- Pt medical record indicated a history of HTN however the pt is not on any BP medications outpatient and BP is controlled and is currently 120/66. 
c.	GERD- Pt is not currently having any symptoms of GERD including pain after eating, coughing, or chest pain, but has likely been taking daily medications
d.	Insulin dependent diabetes- Diabetes is controlled with insulin. There is not a recent HbA1c to determine how well controlled it is. There is no evidence of blurry vision. Feet are not able to be visualized due to ACE bandages.
e.	CAD s/p stent x1- Stable. Pt had troponin of 0.02 and proBNP 1347 however there is no evidence of acute ischemia on EKG and the pt has no chest pain.   
f.	Hypothyroidism- stable, while pt does have feelings of being cold and has weight gain, the weight gain was more rapid than you would expect in hypothyroidism
g.	HLD- Stable pt is taking a statin 
h.	BPH- Pt is not having increased urinary frequency, does not have feelings of straining or the feeling of not being able to empty his bladder. He is currently taking an alpha-1 blocker.  

Plan

1.	Anasarca 
a.	Due to the history of thrombocytopenia with Spironolactone and the VNA doctor stating that furosemide did not work in the past, diuresis with Bumex 2mg should be attempted.  Strict I/Os, and daily weights should be measured. Electrolytes monitored daily with a BMP. 
b.	An echocardiogram and repeat troponins should be obtained in the setting of possible CHF exacerbation which may have been caused by an MI. 
c.	Contact VNA nurse and wife should be contacted to get a better medical history of medications and medical history 
2.	Hx of Cirrhosis
a.	An INR and PT should be obtained to check for liver function. Repeat abdominal US especially of the RUQ and repeat CMP. 
b.	Check AFP for screening for hepatocellular carcinoma since the last AFP was check >1 year ago. 
3.	Normocytic anemia of unknown etiology
a.	The most likely causes are iron deficiency anemia and anemia of chronic disease. Iron studies should be obtained to determine which is occurring so the underlying cause can be treated. 
4.	Potential AKI
a.	Obtain urine lytes and bladder scan to determine etiology. A urinalysis should also be obtained to see if there is any protein excreted. 
5.	Troponinemia 
a.	Trend the troponins again in 6 hours because the pt is asymptomatic and has no evidence of ischemia on EKG
6.	Chronic Conditions
a.	Call pt’s wife to see if we can get a more accurate picture of the patient’s medical history and his current treatments 
b.	A fib- Pt’s A fib is rate controlled and the pt is taking Eliquis. Monitor HR on telemetry. 
c.	HTN- Not on any BP medications outpatient and BP is controlled 120/66. Monitor BP, however because the patient’s medical history was questionable it is possible that he does not have HTN.  
d.	GERD- Continue Pepcid 40mg
e.	Insulin dependent diabetes- Contine Lantus 30 bedtime, plus 5 Lispro TID with meals, monitor postprandial blood glucose. Obtain an HbA1c to determine how well controlled pt’s diabetes is.
f.	CAD s/p stent x1- Continue with ASA 81mg and atorvastatin 40mg
g.	Hypothyroidism- Continue with Levothyroxine 50mcg. Also check TSH. Weight gain is more likely due to bloating due to its rapid onset however hypothyroidism can also cause weight gain therefore TSH should be checked.
h.	HLD- Continue with atorvastatin 40mg 
i.	BPH- Continue tamsulosin 0.5mg daily 




