
Subject: Re: H&P 2
Date: Thu, Aug 11, 2022 12:03 pm
Attachments: Precordial_Movements_2021.pptx (2711K), MidClavicular Line as Landmark CMAJ 1987.pdf (778K),
Liver Ascites Spleen Exam 2020 update.pptx (1739K)
Good morning, Krystle,
Again I want to apologize for interrupting your evening yesterday. When other students have sent H&Ps via OneDrive, it
has taken me an extra day to get "permission" to access them. Somehow, with yours, it didn't do that. Honestly, it is a
system that I don't understand very well.
What I do understand is that your second H&P shows substantial growth and improvement over the first one (which was
quite good also). As you will come to expect from me, I have a bunch of comments, many laudatory and some
constructive. They are as follows:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you indicate the informant and the reliability of the informant right up front. This enables the
reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is reported, which is always very important.
2. Although you don't explicitly give the duration of the chief complaint, it is evident from the phrase "this morning" in the
language of the chief complaint, so the reader can infer that less than several hours elapsed from the onset of the chief
complaint to the patient's appearance in the ER. I commend you for this construction.
3. Your rendition of the HPI is so excellent that I have no substantial suggestions. It is very fluent and articulate and is
constructed with proper attention to chronology. You began it with a statement of the patient's health status at the onset of
the HPI, which is exactly what you should do.
3a. You mention that he notes "occasional reflux" which, really, is a conclusion unless he had some endoscopic or
radiographic procedure that demonstrated this. It would be more "defensible" to say what his symptoms of reflux were/are
(e.g., heartburn) and then the reader can come to the conclusion that it is probably reflux.
3b. It is EXCELLENT that you included, as pertinent negatives, his not using NSAIDs or blood thinners.
3c. It would be a little more complete to specify the route of administration of the vancomycin that he took for his
presumptive C diff episode. It is highly likely that it was oral, but it would be a little more complete to say this explicitly.
4. The GI bleed history that you placed in the Past Medical History is really part of the HPI and is already mentioned, so
it does not really need to be repeated. (In my world, HPI and Past Medical History are mutually exclusive. Your misfortune
is having me as your H&P advisor, with my quirks.)
5. It would be more complete to state when the right shoulder surgery was done, if known. If not known, that can be
stated.
6. With the smoking history, it is a more informative to state the age at which he started and what his daily tobacco use
was and for how many years. The reader can calculate the pack years, but it is, to me, useful to know how many years the
patient actually was a smoker. It is EXCELLENT that you stated explicitly when he stopped smoking.
7. In the family history it is always useful to include the ages of the individual mentioned.
8. I COMMEND YOU for including the manifestation of his allergy.
9. Several items in the ROS are really part of the HPI. You can introduce the rest by saying "in addition to what is in the
HPI..." rather than repeat what is already in the document. Pretend that ink is very expensive!
10. Something that is done much too infrequently by people at all levels is orthostatic vital signs. In this patient, with his
near-syncope, this would have been very informative and would have suggest the urgency and extent of certain remedial
measures.
11. I COMMEND YOU for separating rate and rhythm and the adjectives describing them. Keep up this good practice.
12. I must confess that I am a little dubious that there was no conjunctival pallor in a patient with a hemoglobin in the 7's
and 8's.
13. It is not very informative to say that the PMI is non-displaced. It should be measured from an immobile landmark (the
mid-sternal line) and with the appropriate intercostal space specified. I caution you not to use the mid-clavicular line as a
landmark as the clavicle moves. There is literature reporting that the location of the PMI can vary by as much as 10 cm
when the mid-clavicular line is used, depending on the examiner and the position of the upper extremity. If you do it as I
suggest, it is reproducible from examiner to examiner and can be used to compare findings at different points in time. I am
attaching some materials about this.
14. I feel that the liver size should be specifically mentioned in all patients, but especially in one like this one. I think I may
have send you my slide set on the liver exam, but in case I didn't I'll attach them to this email.
15. It surprises me that there is no mention of fecal occult blood testing. I would want it on every stool he produces.
16. It would be reasonable to get iron studies as part of the patient's early lab evaluations.
17. (It is relevant to note that his high BUN with normal creatinine is suggestive of GI bleeding. The high nitrogen load
from blood in the gut is one of the causes of pre-renal azotemia.)
18. The low transaminases are interesting. I am not sure what they mean, given the normal INR.
8/11/22, 12:04 PM Re: H&P 2

19. Likewise for the relatively low alkaline phosphatase. Sometimes there is a congenital hypophosphatasia, which is
often fatal. I will have to look this up.
20. This is trivial nit-picking, but in the physical you describe the murmur as 2/6 and in the Assessment/Plan paragraph
about the lightheadedness you describe it as 3/6. It is best not to contradict yourself. When we speak in real time I'll tell
you why.
21. Your EBM article is very well chosen and quite relevant.
To me, this patient must be scoped from above and below and if there is no source of GI bleeding noted then he is
absolutely a candidate for capsule endoscopy. He may have A-V malformations or some sort of telangiectatic lesion.
Given his heart murmur, there is an entity called Heyde's syndrome, which includes duodenal angiodysplasia.
this is a very nicely constructed H&P and you have carried out a very relevant literature search that has immediate
implications for this patient. I am very pleased with the growth that you have shown in just a short time and I look forward
to your next H&P. If you would like to speak with me in real time, please send me a text with some acceptable times. I
have an appointment this afternoon that will tie me up from about 1:30 to about 3:30.
Keep up the excellent work!!!!!
6756