
CC: Chest pain for 1 day
Informant: Patient. He is reliable. History was taken with an interpreter as the patient speaks 
Spanish as his native language
HPI: The patient is a 58 year old male with no PMH that was in his usual state of health when 
he noticed chest pain at noon the day before admission to the hospital. He describes the pain 
as being in his chest and points to his sternum when asked to locate the pain. It initially came 
on with exertion but now is constant and occurs at rest. He says it was one of the worst pains of 
his life. He states the it feels like a tight squeezing and that it is accompanied by a feeling of 
clogging in his chest that prevented him from being able to breathe. He states there was some 
discomfort in his left shoulder yesterday but none currently. The pain prevented him from 
sleeping last night, and early in the morning he went to a drug store and bought some Tylenol. 
The Tylenol helped with his pain but did not resolve it completely, after which he came to the 
emergency room. He does not describe any palpitations and has had no N/V/D. 
ROS:
 General: States no fever / chills / fatigue. No recent travel or sick contacts.
 Neuro: States no dizziness / numbness / tingling
 HEENT: States no headache / sore throat / coryza / change in vision or hearing
 CV: See HPI
 Pulm: See HPI. States no cough or pain with breathing
 GI: See HPI. States no abdominal pain or discomfort
 GU: States no change in urination or pain with urination
 MSK: States no joint or muscle pain
 Heme: States no easy bruising or nose bleeds
 Derm: States no rashes or skin changes
PMH
 None
Medications
 None
Allergies
 None
FH
 States he is not in contact with his father, mother, or siblings and could not provide their 
current health status. He is not aware of any family history of HTN / HLD / DM / Cancer.
SH
 Live at home by himself. Immigrated to United States from Mexico approximately in year 
2000
 Works in a local restaurant as a cook
 Drink 2-3 beers each day after work
 States no tobacco or other drug use
Beier Matthew H&P 5 submitted Thu 7/22 evening
Vitals:
 T 97.1F
 HR 75 and regular
 BP 150/90
 RR 16, normal inspiratory effort with no use of accessory muscles
 SpO2 100% on RA
PE:
 General: Patient is in no acute distress, is well nourished, and answers appropriately
 Neuro: A&Ox3, CN II-XII are intact, motor and sensation grossly intact, no obvious FND 
 HEENT: EOMI, PERRLA, sclera anicteric, no conjunctival pallor, no signs or pharyngeal 
erythema, lesions, or ulcers
 Neck: Trachea is midline, no elevation in JVD or hepatojugular reflux, no palpable lymph 
nodes, could not palpate thyroid
 CV: Regular rate and regular rhythm, normal S1/S2 no murmurs, rubs, or gallops
 Lungs: Normal inspiratory effort. Lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no 
wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. Normal resonance to percussion bilaterally and in all fields.
 Abdominal: Soft and nondistended. Normal BS. Non-tender to palpation. No rigidity. 
The liver and spleen were not palpable.
 Extremities: Radial and DP and 2+/2+ and symmetric. Equal strength in upper 
extremities on flexion/extension of wrists and forearm. No signs of edema in shins 
bilaterally. Warm and well perfused. 
 Skin: No evidence of rashes, skin breakdown, or ulcers.
Labs
 CBC: WBC 5.6, Hb 9.4, Hct 33.8, Plt 243, MCV 75
 BMP: Na 136, Cl 102, K 4.1, Ca 8.2, HCO3 23, BUN 14, Cr 0.5, Glucose 137
 High sensitivity troponin: 380
 CXR: Possible opacity in left lower lobe. No evidence of cardiomegaly
 EKG: T wave inversions in leads V4-6
Assessment: Patient is a 58 year old male with no PMH that presents to the ED with one day of 
chest pain first on exertion and now at rest, and was accompanied by SOB. His CV and 
Pulmonary PE were unremarkable but initial labs were significant for elevated cardiac troponin 
and T wave inversions on EKG.
#Chest pain
 The patient’s presentation, elevated cardiac enzymes, and EKG finds are concerning for 
ACS and specifically an NSTEMI. Cardiology should be consulted immediately for 
possible intervention and the patient should be started on anti-platelet therapy of ASA 
and Plavix. He should also be started on a heparin drip for anticoagulation. Sublingual 
nitroglycerin should be administered. Given his current SpO2 he does not need 
supplemental oxygen. A beta blocker may also be considered. While ACS appears 
most likely, PE should also be considered. His Wells score suggests he is at low risk of 
PE.
Beier Matthew H&P 5 submitted Thu 7/22 evening
#Anemia
 The patient has a microcytic anemia. Iron studies should be ordered for workup of his 
anemia.
Education: When is cardiac catherization indicated for patients suspected of NSTEMI?
 According to UpToDate, patients with high suspicion of NSTEMI are indicated for 
intervention when they are hemodynamically unstable, have severe LV dysfunction, 
recurrent anginal pain refractory to medical management, new or worsening mitral 
regurgitation, or sustained ventricle arrhythmias. Our patient does not appear to have 
any of these, although a bedside echo would be useful to evaluate LV function and look 
for any mitral regurgitation. Additionally, a TIMI risk score can be used to risk stratify 
patients for cardiac catherization. High risk is a score of >= 5 and intermediate risk is 3-
4. Both of these groups were shown to benefit from intervention in the TACTICS-TIMI 
trial. Based on my calculation, our patient’s TIMI score is 2, so it would be reasonable to 
try medical management first and see if he has resolution of symptoms and 
improvement on EKG and of cardiac enzymes.