

As you have caused me to expect, your sixth H&P has many strengths. And, as usual, I also have a few constructive
suggestions. My comments are as follows:
1. I commend you for indicating the informant and his reliability quite clearly up front.
2. I would be more complete to include, with the chief complaint, a statement of its duration.
3. Your reporting of the HPI is excellent, as usual, and is done quite succinctly, considering how complex this history is.
It is perhaps a little less chronological than some might have written it, but the overall chronology is clear enough. Some
people (including me) would have included, in the HPI, the symptoms that led up to the initial diagnosis of bowel carcinoma
and how it was documented. (There are some patients whose cancer is documented at colon resection because of very
worrisome imaging; and some with colon cancer, as I am sure you know, may present with hematochezia or simply a
positive test of fecal occult blood. In order to teach ourselves how to recognize the earliest stages of an illness, it is always
useful to begin at the very beginning, when that is possible.)
4. The first three items in the past medical history are really integral parts of the HPI and need not be repeated.
5. In the past medical history, it might have been a little more informative to include more detail about the atrial
fibrillation: is it intermittent/paroxysmal, and how has it been treated. I say this because it would make interpretation of the
vital signs, with a regular rhythm, easier to interpret.
6. It is interesting that he has mitral stenosis and an atrial septal defect, and yet no murmur was heard on the physical
examination. (It is also interesting to note that he has had what must be intermittent atrial fibrillation and has had episodic
CNS symptoms, in the presence of an atrial septal defect. Some might want that defect to be closed in a patient with this
type of risk for peripheral emboli, in addition to the anticoagulation.)
7. It would be more complete to include the ages and gender of the children.
8. I commend you for referring to the HPI when appropriate in the ROS.
9. I commend you for spelling "pruritus" correctly.
10. In the general physical appearance, it would be a little more informative to say what it is about his appearance that
makes him "ill appearing".
11. I commend you for percussing the chest.
12. I commend you very enthusiastically for quantifying the liver size, especially in someone with an active GI malignancy.
13. (This is mostly a semantic point, but I want you to know it: Pain is a symptom. Tenderness is a sign that we elicit. So
when you palpated around his stoma site, what you noted was tenderness, not pain. He may have complained of pain
when you touched him; but the finding is tenderness. I know that this sounds trivial, but my training has insisted that I
distinguish between symptoms and signs. In general I believe that this is a very good practice.)
14. Your discussions in the Assessment and Plan section are characteristically outstanding: They are quite thorough and
very thoughtful.
15. Among the many things to learn from this patient, one of the most important is his independence regarding the goal of
his therapy. He recognizes that cure is not possible and has opted for palliative care. It is truly an art to support a patient
under these circumstances. (You strike me as the type of compassionate person who would be especially well suited to
care for this type of patient. And I mean that as a high compliment.)
16. Although the reference that you cited for EBM is a little dated, it is certainly relevant to this patient. I wonder if the
initial drug choice has changed at all in the last 11+ years.

yet again you have done excellent work with this H&P. I receive it with mixed emotions, because, as uplifting as it
has been to interact with you, this is the last time I will be able to do it under these circumstances. I hope that you have
not found my comments to be harsh or tedious. Please know that their intent is always to enhance your professional
growth.
I hope to maintain contact with you for a long time. You have my email and my cell number. Please feel welcome to use
them as you feel appropriate.
Much success as you move forward.
Respectfully,

