History and Physical Exam
Date: 10/07/2020
Referral Source: ED
Data Source: Patient (reliable), Patient’s son (reliable), ED physician note (reliable), Progress notes from 
past admissions at RWJUH (reliable)
Chief Complaint: Dyspnea on exertion for one month
Mr. S is a 76 year-old male with a past medical history of congestive heart failure, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease requiring coronary artery bypass grafting x4, left carotid 
endarterectomy, atrial fibrillation requiring placement of a permanent pacemaker, three months postcerebellar stroke, two months post-watchman procedure, diabetes mellitus with two toe amputations, 
and chronic kidney disease, presenting with dyspnea on exertion for the past one month. He was in his 
usual state until one month ago when he began experiencing shortness of breath while climbing the six 
steps to his second-floor bedroom. He reports being unable to walk more than one block for the past 
few months due to dyspnea, but in the last month, his mobility and dyspnea has gotten worse. He was 
on nasal cannula 2L oxygen for 1-2 weeks after his Watchman procedure one month ago and stopped 
using oxygen 2 weeks ago. He saw his cardiologist two days ago and the ordered outpatient labs showed 
a low hemoglobin of 7.8 (baseline ~10). On admission, he reports shortness of breath on exertion, 
fatigue, blurry vision, constipation and bloating, and dark stools. He has a history of GI bleeding on both 
Warfarin and Eliquis and he reports taking Eliquis after his Watchman procedure until today. He does 
not report shortness of breath at rest but states that he sleeps using two pillows. He does not have 
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, cough, leg swelling, dizziness, headaches, or chest pain. He does not 
report easy bruising, bleeding, hematochezia, abdominal pain, bloody stools. He has never had a 
colonoscopy before. No polyuria or other urinary complaints. 
Upon arriving in the ED, he was found to be borderline bradycardic at 60bpm and he had an oxygen 
saturation of 93%. He was started on NS 250cc bolus IV and protonix 80mg IV. Troponins were ordered 
along with a proBNP, CBC, BMP, a PT and PTT. He is going to be admitted to the medical floor.
Past Medical History
Atrial Fibrillation
Congestive Heart Failure
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia
Diabetes Mellitus
CKD Stage III
Gout
COPD
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
GERD
Past Surgical History
Watchman Procedure, August 2020
Permanent Pacemaker placement, July 2020
Left Carotid Endarterectomy, 2017
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft x 4, 2004
Toe Amputations
Cataract Surgery
Medications
Lasix 40mg by mouth BID
Metoprolol Extended Release 50 mg by mouth daily at night
Atorvastatin 40 mg by mouth daily at 10 pm
Losartan Potassium 50mg by mouth daily
Doxazosin 1 mg by mouth daily after breakfast
Eliquis 2.5 mg by mouth BID (last day today)
Aspirin Chewable 81 mg by mouth daily
Pantoprazole Delayed Release Tablet 40 mg by mouth daily
Fluticasone-Vilanterol 100 mcg-25 mcg/ 1 puff inhalation daily
Allopurinol 100 mg by mouth daily
Glipizide 10mg by mouth daily
Cholecalciferol 25 MCG Vitamin D3 (1000 UT) BID
Iron 325 (65 FE) by mouth daily
Allergies
NKDA
Family History
Father: heart disease
Mother: diabetes
Son: Ewing Sarcoma
Social History
Smoked 3 packs/day for 15-20 years. Drinks socially. No drug use. Retired fireman, 25 years ago. Lives at 
home with his daughter.
Review of Systems:
General: no fevers, see HPI
HEENT: denies hearing changes, see HPI
CV: see HPI
Resp: see HPI
GI: see HPI
GU: see HPI
Skin: not assessed
Neuro: see HPI
Derm: no rashes
Endo: see HPI
Neuro: no loss of consciousness, no focal deficits 
MSK: difficulty ambulating 
Physical Exam
T: 97.3, HR: 60 and regular, BP: 122/57, RR: 16, SpO2: 93% 
Gen: Laying in bed, appears comfortable and in no acute distress
HEENT: conjunctival pallor, sclera anicteric, mucus membranes moist
Neck: large neck circumference on appearance
Cardio: regular rate and rhythm, normal S1/S2, distant heart sounds, no murmurs/rubs/gallops, no JVD, 
no hepatojugular reflex
Pulmonary: unlabored breathing, no wheezing, decreased breath sounds bilaterally specifically around 
the bases, crackles bilaterally in mainly the lower lobes, bronchial breath sounds in left lower lung
Abdomen: normal bowel sounds, soft, nontender, distended, no guarding, hepatomegaly on liver 
scratch test
Pelvic: not assessed
Extremities: extremities are warm and well-perfused, no clubbing/cyanosis. 1+ non-pitting LE edema
mainly concentrated at ankles up to the mid-calf, thick skin brown discoloration and bruising around 
ankles up to the mid-calf
Skin: No rashes
Neuro: awake alert and oriented x 3, responding appropriately, moving all limbs equally, no focal neuro 
deficits noted
Psych: not assessed
Labs
Troponin T: 0.03 [10/07, 12:59]
Troponin T: 0.03 [10/07, 11:26]
Imaging
DX Chest 1 View
CLINICAL INDICATION: R06.00 - Dyspnea
TECHNIQUE: A single view of the chest was obtained.
COMPARISON: 8/17/2020.
IMPRESSION:
Postsurgical changes/Catheters and Support Devices: Sternal wires, surgical clips and single lead 
left-sided pacer.
Lungs and Pleural Spaces: Patient's chin partially obscures both medial lung apices. Persistent 
left pleural effusion with loculated pleural fluid or thickening laterally. Cannot exclude left base 
infiltrator atelectasis. Diffuse increased markings bilaterally which may represent congestive 
changes. No definite pneumothorax.
Heart/Mediastinum: No change.
Summary: Diffuse increased markings possibly due to congestive changes. Persistent left pleural 
effusion, as above. Cannot exclude left base infiltrate/atelectasis.
KUB X-ray: awaiting report; upon preliminary read, transverse colon filled with stool
Summary: 
Mr. S is a 76 year-old male with a past medical history of congestive heart failure, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease requiring coronary artery bypass grafting x4, left carotid 
endarterectomy, atrial fibrillation with a permanent pacemaker, three months post-cerebellar stroke,
two months post-watchman procedure, diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease, presenting with 
dyspnea on exertion for the past one month. Review of systems is positive for shortness of breath on 
exertion, fatigue, blurry vision, constipation and bloating, and dark stools. On physical exam, the cardiac 
exam was normal, the lung exam showed decreased breath sounds bilaterally specifically around the 
bases with crackles bilaterally in lower lobes, abdominal exam showed hepatomegaly, and lower 
extremities showed 1+ non-pitting edema concentrated along the ankles up to the mid-calf and thick 
skin with brown discoloration and bruising. Labs showed a proBNP of 14868pg/mL, low hemoglobin, 
hematocrit, high prothrombin time, high BUN (92), high creatinine (3.0), low GFR (20), low sodium (135), 
low bicarb (17.2), and two mildly elevated troponins (0.03). Chest Xray shows diffuse increased markings 
possibly due to congestive changes and persistent left pleural effusion. Most likely etiology of dyspnea is 
CHF exacerbation.
Assessment and Plan
1. Dyspnea
a. Congestive Heart Failure exacerbation is the most likely etiology because of this 
patient's presentation of fluid retention and exertional dyspnea and a proBNP level of 
14868pg/mL. proBNP has a 90% sensitivity and 76% specificity for CHF. His past medical 
history of coronary artery disease, hypertension, and arrythmia are contributory factors
to structural heart disease. His bilateral crackles in the lower lobes and chest xray 
showing diffuse increased markings suggests pulmonary congestion, which is a classic 
finding of congestive heart failure and resultant fluid overload. Last month, the patient 
received an echocardiogram which showed a reduced ejection fraction 50-55%, also 
suggesting cardiac dysfunction. He classifies as class 2 on the New York Heart 
Association’s scale for heart failure due to his presentation of shortness of breath with 
everyday activity. His BREST score 8 indicating intermediate, borderline high risk and a 
58-91.5% of being diagnosed with CHF. BREST is a validated a CHF clinical prediction rule 
intended to improve the accuracy of a heart failure diagnosis in ED patients at bedside
(Basset A, Nowak E, Castellant P, Gut-gobert C, Le gal G, L'her E. Development of a 
clinical prediction score for congestive heart failure diagnosis in the emergency care 
setting: The Brest score. Am J Emerg Med. 2016;34(12):2277-2283).
Anemia is also on the differential and supported by his HgB of 7.8 on outpatient labs 
(baseline 10), a positive stool guaiac, and his report of feeling fatigued for the past 
month and seeing dark stools. Anemia may also be a cause of high output heart failure.
COPD exacerbation is on the differential, but less likely since he does not report cough 
and chest x-rays do not show hyperinflated lungs. Lastly, a myocardial infarct is also a 
possibility considering his history of coronary artery disease and status post coronary 
artery bypass graftx4, however two troponin levels have returned negative since he 
came to the ED and he denies chest pain.
b. Plan:
i. Order Oxygen Nasal Cannula 2L/min to manage dyspnea acutely. Continue 
Fluticasone-Vilanterol 100 mcg-25 mcg/ 1 puff inhalation daily.
ii. Order transthoracic echocardiography to assess systolic and diastolic function 
(including evaluation of left ventricular ejection fraction to confirm reduced 
ejection fraction), myocardial wall thickness, and valve function. Consult 
cardiology as well. Keep NPO.
iii. Continue with Lasix 40 IV BID and order pneumatic compression stockings to aid 
in reducing lower extremity edema.
iv. Continue trending troponins and check cardiac enzymes to rule out possible MI
v. Start telemetry since patient has a history of atrial fibrillation and heart failure
vi. Continue home hypertension and hyperlipidemia meds, except Losartan. 
Continue aspirin. Continue vitamins.
2. Anemia
a. Indicated by Hgb 7.8
b. Order Iron and Binding Capacity and Ferritin to check for iron deficiency anemia. 
c. Patient may need to get a colonoscopy, but is currently refusing. Check his preference 
again tomorrow and counsel him on its need and importance. Consult GI regarding 
possible endoscopy. 
d. Hold Eliquis for now since he has a history of bleeding while on the medication
e. Continue Iron 325 (65 FE) by mouth daily and cholecalciferol 25 MCG Vitamin D3 (1000 
UT) BID
f. Since the patient is currently volume overloaded, no transfusion is indicated at this time.
If hemoglobin drops below 7, consider 1 unit PRBC transfusion
g. Repeat stool guaic tomorrow
3. Acute Kidney Injury
a. The patient's creatinine is 3.0 (baseline ~1.8). His acute kidney injury may be due to 
volume overload. BUN/Cr ratio is 30.67, suggesting a prerenal azotemia and lending 
support to a cardiorenal syndrome. Order urine studies (random urine electrolytes, urin 
protein, microalbumin, urine BUN)
b. Hold home losartan as it could be exacerbating CHF reducing blood pressure and 
contributing to the AKI by vasodilating the efferent arteriole and decreasing glomerular 
pressures
c. Follow up with renal ultrasound
4. Abdominal distension
a. KUB Xray showed stool in the transverse colon, likely constipation.
b. Senna tablet 1 tab by mouth BID and Miralax 17 gm by mouth BID
5. Hepatomegaly
a. Possibly congestive hepatopathy from CHF or rarely statin hepatoxicity
b. Monitor for now. Check for signs of decrease in liver function 
6. Diabetes
a. Start Insulin Lispro sliding scale subq before each meal and bedtime
7. Gout 
a. Continue on allopurinol
8. GERD 
a. Continue on pantoprazole
9. Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia
a. Continue on Dozaxosin
F: none
E: replete
N: cardiac diet
P: heparin
Dispo: med-surg, tele
Code: unknown