
I noted your absence with disappointment, but the rotations through RWJ Somerset are necessary and beneficial. I will be
doing the Clinical Challenge session on March 13 when you come back.
Again I want to express my appreciation for your promptness in getting this H&P to me by Wednesday evening. I have
reviewed it carefully and have noted many very fine strengths. And there are a few constructive comments that I will make
as well.
1. It is excellent that you identify the informant and her reliability right up front.
2. It is excellent that you have included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. Let me note from the beginning that I appreciate your not using "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in stating the
patient's reporting of information.
4. The HPI is very, very nicely composed and written. As the system involved in this is cardiac, some people (including
me) would begin with the onset of the first portion of her cardiac system to be involved with an abnormality. In this patient's
case it might be the hypertension. Especially in CHF patients, it is very important to document whether and how well blood
pressure is controlled over time. In addition it would be useful to give a little more detail about the history of atrial
fibrillation--when it started, how it was evaluated (e.g., was a thyroid work-up included), and whether there have been any
problems managing it.
5. It is outstanding that you have quantified weight gain and extent of orthopnea and documented the absence of
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
6. You have astutely avoided repeating in the ROS things that are in the HPI!
7. But most of what you have included in the PMHx is really HPI. (It might have been good to mention a little more about
the obstructive sleep apnea, even in the HPI, as this can be a risk for cardiac problems.
8. The same is true for the surgical history (cardiac ablation). I assume this was done because of the atrial fibrillation,
but it would be good to state that explicitly and what the outcome was.
9. Given that Poly-Iron 150 Forte is a multi-component supplement whose actual content may not be known to every
reader, it would have been more informative to say what is in it. (in addition to iron, it has B12 and folic acid.)
10. Although you (brilliantly!) discuss the role of empagliflozin in this setting in your EBM, it might have been useful to
indicate in the HPI when it was started and why, especially since there is no history of diabetes.
11. I commend you highly for clearly stating the way her allergies manifest themselves. This is a very important detail
often omitted by physicians.
12. In the social history, occupational history and marital status are usually included.
13. With atrial fibrillation patients, it is very useful to include the heart rate both at the apex and at a peripheral artery. The
extent of the pulse deficit (the difference between the two rates, which is almost always present with atrial fibrillation) can
sometimes have therapeutic implications.
14. Given her history of OSA, it is very good that you included the BMI with the vital signs.
15. In this patient, especially, the neck veins should have been mentioned in the physical exam, as well as the presence
or absence of hepatojugular reflux.
16. I commend you for percussing the chest!!! And whenever there is dullness it is always good to look for egophony.
17. Please note that it is the rhythm that is irregularly irregular. The rate is either normal, rapid, or slow.
18. I commend you for mentioning the palpability of the liver edge. Did you note its total span, as a way of estimating its
size?
19. It would have been appropriate to include the glucose in the labs, as well as the BUN, as sometimes this may give you
a clue regarding a component of pre-renal azotemia and overall hydration status.
20. I think it would have been more complete to mention the mild hypoxemia (O2 saturation only 93% with supplemental
oxygen). One thing that might make your discussion a little more complete would be to include the possibility of pulmonary
embolism in the differential diagnosis. Even the DOACs don't necessarily work 100% of the time.
21. Your EBM is WONDERFUL!!!!! It is a topic of which I had known nothing before reading your note, and it clearly
explains why a non-diabetic is on empagliflozin. I am thrilled with the judgment that went into this selection. And your
interpretation of the paper and its relevance to this patient are superb!
you are going from strength to strength and your growth as a clinician is exciting to witness. I am eager to see
H&P 4 and also to see you in person on 3/13.
Have a great weekend!
