
Subject: Re: Last one! HP6
Date: Wed, Feb 8, 2023 1:38 pm
Good afternoon, Yaerin,
First, I must thank you for getting the write-up to me so early in the week (Tuesday evening!!!). The only think that makes
me less than completely happy is the knowledge that this will be the last H&P that you will send for my review. It has been
a true privilege to teach you.
As for my "usual" comments:
1. First, I want to say from the outset that I appreciate your avoidance of my "allergy" words: "admit" "claim" "deny" and
"endorse". Kamza Hamneda. (I don't know if that came out right. I can't use the proper alphabet, of course.)
2. I commend you, again, for indicating the informant and for including an assessment of the informant's reliability. It
enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to the history he reports and may justify looking for other
ways to document the reported symptoms.
3. And, again, I commend you for including the duration of the chief complaint. The one thing I might not have done is to
use the phrase "flu-like" as it does not add to what you have with simply naming the symptoms. (In fact, vomiting and,
especially, diarrhea are not characteristic of influenza.)
4. You constructed the History of Present Illness excellently. It is valuable that you included the similar symptoms in his
household contact.
5. It is outstanding that you included the history that he has not had immunizations for COVID or influenza.
6. It might have been appropriate to include the history of COVID infection in the HPI, perhaps with a little history of how
he tolerated it.
7. I am not certain if the use of italics in the paragraph about his history of hepatitis C was for a reason. If so, what was
it?
8. In the social history, it would be more complete to try to summarize prior employment history even if at present he is
not employed.
9. I commend you for the way you recorded the smoking history.
10. This is one of the lower BMIs that I have seen in an adult inpatient in NJ. It speaks volumes and it was very astute of
you to include this in the vitals.
11. I commend you for commenting on his cachectic appearance.
12. I commend you for noting his problems with respiration. Was it decreased effort or decreased expansion despite effort
(which might be accompanied by retraction of intercostal muscles with respiration).
13. You have the abdominal exam down pat!. One way to describe the spleen findings is to say that the spleen tip is not
palpable. I do this because by the time one can feel the spleen it is three times normal size; so it can be enlarged without
being palpable. One way you could look for this is to percuss the left upper quadrant, which should be resonant to
tympanitic because of gastric or colonic gas. If it is dull, in addition to pulmonary consolidation or pleural effusion, it could
be due to a spleen that is enlarged but not yet palpable. I fear that CT scans have lessened our use of the physical exam
for this type of finding.
14. Your assessment and plan are, as usual, excellent. I personally would not consider him as having a PMH of HIV, as it
still remains an active problem even though it is not making him sick. I might just say "with quiescent HIV disease under
active treatment".
15. The one substantial addition I would suggest to this otherwise outstanding write-up is to include a social worker in his
management. He illustrates the concept of "Social Determinants of Health (SODH)" that are so very important in the total
picture of a patient's clinical status.
It has been absolutely thrilling to see how you have progressed from what was, in fact, quite a strong beginning. I
believe that you are destined to be a leader in your generation of clinicians. Among the things that inspire me about you is
that you have used your gifts wisely, with the outcome that you have grown wonderfully in the short span of less than six
weeks. I will miss interacting with you, even in writing, but you must move forward. It would please me greatly if, from time
to time, you would drop me a note with updates about how you are doing and what your professional plans are. And if you
feel that any further input from me, regarding your future, would be of value, I would be happy to provide it.
I wish you a great outcome on the Shelf Exam and the brilliant future that is your destiny.
Very respectfully,
