
* History provided by patient herself who is a fairly reliable historian with her own medical 
history.
CC: syncopal episode
HPI: XXXXX XXXXX is a relatively healthy 71-year-old female with a past medical history 
including depression, IBS, fibromyalgia, and osteoporosis who has been doing well until 
yesterday when she presented to the ED late last night after she had a syncopal episode at her 
home. She had been feeling well until yesterday when she reports not having had much to eat or 
drink during the day because she hadn’t had much of an appetite. In the evening everything was 
alright until she got out of bed from reading to go to the bathroom. While walking to the 
bathroom she recalls feeling “off” – not particularly dizzy or lightheaded, but just “off”. As she 
continued to walk she felt worse so she decided to go to the kitchen to grab something to eat. 
Upon arriving in the kitchen she reports that the started to feel dizzy and off balance and needed 
to use the kitchen island for support. At this point she felt like she was going to pass out, so she 
went to sit down on the chair in the kitchen. She sat down and then the last thing she remembers 
is waking up on the floor with her left cheek on the ground, head facing the oven. She reports not 
feeling confused after the incident. She reports that she was not incontinent of stool or urine and 
she did not bite her tongue. There was no one else in the kitchen to witness her fall. She was not 
able to get up from the ground by herself. She had to scoot on her bottom into her bedroom to 
grab her phone and call her husband who was upstairs to come help her get off the floor. After
the incident she has been experiencing some left wrist pain, a mild headache around her left eye, 
no changes in vision, intermittent nausea, but no vomiting, palpitations, and mild dizziness. The 
patient has never had an occurrence like this before. She has not had any recent illness, fever, 
chills, fatigue, arthralgias, myalgias, cough, chest pain, or shortness of breath. She hasn’t had any 
weakness or sensory deficits. She has not experienced any stressors lately or was not feeling 
particularly stressed or emotional prior to the syncopal episode.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:
Depression, IBS (since her 30s), fibromyalgia (diagnosed in her 30s), osteoporosis (diagnosed in 
her early 60s)
PAST SURGICAL HISTORY:
Hysterectomy (55 years of age)
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Patient has never smoked cigarettes. She does not drink alcohol. Patient is a retired school 
teacher (special ed and elementary). Patient married.
FAMILY HISTORY:
She reports that there was "heart disease” on her mother's side, but her “mother did not have 
heart disease herself". Her mother passed when she was 88, the cause of which is unknown to the 
patient.
She is unaware of any medical problems that her father had, who passed when he was 85, the 
cause of which is unknown to the patient.
Patient has one daughter who is healthy.
Medications
Lubiprostone24 mcg BID
Multivitamin with folic acid
Trazodone 100 mg qd (has been taking same dose for 2 years)


Allergies:
Penicillin – rash when she was younger
ROS:
CONSTITUTIONAL: See HPI.
HEENT: See HPI.
RESPIRATORY: See HPI.
CV: See HPI.
GI: See HPI.
GU: Denies dysuria and urinary frequency.
MSK: See HPI.
SKIN: Denies rash and pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: See HPI.
PSYCHIATRIC: Denies recent changes in mood. Denies anxiety and depression.
 
Objective 
VITALS:
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) -
Temp: [36.8 °C (98.2 °F)] 36.8 °C (98.2 °F)
Heart Rate: [67-97] 67
HR lying 72; standing 75
Resp: [16-18] 17
BP: (119-166)/(58-78) 124/64
BP lying 116/60; standing 118/62
SpO2: [96 %-99 %] 97 %
Height - 1.6 m (5' 3")
Weight - 48.7 kg (107 lb 5.8 oz)
Body mass index is 19.02 kg/m².
PHYSICAL EXAM:
GENERAL: Alert and oriented x 3. No acute distress. Well-nourished.
EYES: EOMI. Anicteric.
HENT: Moist mucous membranes. No scleral icterus. No cervical lymphadenopathy. (+) area of 
swelling surrounding left eyebrow with overlying ecchymosis.
LUNGS: Clear to auscultation bilaterally. No accessory muscle use.
CARDIOVASCULAR: Regular rate and rhythm. No murmur. No JVD.
ABDOMEN: Soft, non-tender and non-distended. No palpable masses.
EXTREMITIES: No edema. Non-tender. Left wrist in brace without obvious deformity, 
swelling or effusion.
SKIN: No rashes or lesions. Warm.
NEUROLOGIC: No focal neurological deficits. CN II-XII grossly intact, but not individually 
tested.
PSYCHIATRIC: Cooperative. Appropriate mood and affect.
LABS:
Na+ 144
K+ 4.09
BUN 16
Creatinine 0.592
Glucose 110


WBC 6.44
Hb 13.1
Mg 1.9
IMAGING, AND OTHER STUDIES:
CT Head without Contrast - 1. No acute intracranial abnormality. Scattered scalp hyperdensities
that are indeterminate including within a region of left periorbital soft tissue swelling. Correlate 
clinically, especially if there is concern for foreign body.
MRI Brain with and without contrast - No acute intracranial abnormality. Left periorbital soft 
tissue swelling.
MRA Neck without Contrast- No high-grade stenosis or large vessel occlusion involving cervical 
carotid or vertebral arteries
MRA Brain without Contrast - No high-grade stenosis, large vessel occlusion or large aneurysm 
involving intracranial anterior or posterior circulation.
Left wrist X-ray - Soft tissue swelling without identified interval acute fracture or dislocation.
Osteopenia and degenerative changes. Stable presumably bony densities adjacent to the 
trapezium indeterminate, possibly representing sequela of old injury, foreign bodies not entirely 
excluded, however, unchanged.
CXR 1. Nonspecific interstitial prominence, possibly representing emphysematous changes, 
correlate clinically. 2. No lobar or segmental consolidation.
EKG – normal sinus rhythm. No ST or T wave abnormalities.
US Carotid Duplex Bilateral – MILD CAROTID DISEASE BILATERALLY WITH <50% 
STENOSIS. 
TTE - Left ventricular systolic function is normal
No regional wall motion abnormality is noted.
Ejection Fraction = 55-60%.
Right ventricular systolic function is normal.
The right atrium is mildly dilated.
The left atrium is mildly dilated.
There is mild aortic annular calcification.
No hemodynamically significant valvular aortic stenosis.
Structurally normal mitral valve with normal opening.
Trace to small pericardial effusion.
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
XXXXX XXXXX is a 71 y.o. female with a history of IBS, fibromyalgia, and osteoporosis 
who presented to the ED after an episode where she lost consciousness while sitting and fell to 
the floor, hitting her head on the ground. Patient with symptoms of mild unilateral left headache
and intermittent nausea, and left eye swelling and ecchymosis. Orthostatic BP is negative and 
other vitals stable. CTH and MRI brain negative for acute hemorrhage or infarct; MRA neck and 
brain without high grade stenosis or large vessel occlusion.


#syncope
Given the patient’s presentation with an acute episode of syncope without any identifiable risk 
factors other than poor PO intake the day of the episode, and her prescription of Trazadone it is 
most likely that this episode can be attributed to one of those. Side effects of concern of 
Trazadone in this patient include dizziness, changes in appetite, orthostatic hypotension, and QT 
prolongation. Orthostatics were negative on examination in the hospital so this is less likely the 
culprit; however, it is possible that she experienced an isolated episode of orthostatic 
hypotension that led to her syncope, but given the fact that there have not been new changes to 
her medication dose recently it may be less likely. This could also be true for the side effect of 
QT prolongation, however her EKG did not demonstrate evidence of QT prolongation. 
Although, she did report that she took her Trazodone while lying in bed reading and this is 
typical for her, but instead of reading and getting up after taking it, she usually goes straight to 
sleep. Thus, it is possible that the Trazadone has caused her side effects in the past, but she was 
just not aware of it. Furthermore, she did eat and drink less during the day thus making it 
possible that her body was more sensitive than usual to the medication. Given this possibility of 
Trazodone side effect, the patient should follow up with her prescribing doctor to evaluate her 
dose and monitor for further symptoms. If symptoms present, patient should half her daily dose 
to prevent further episodes in the interim.
Other etiologies of syncope that could have led the patient to experience this episode include the 
following:
1. Poor PO intake - considering the patient's poor intake for the entire day prior to the 
episode, it is possible that the syncope was caused by hypovolemia/dehydration.
However, patient’s volume status was adequate on admission to the hospital. Moist 
mucus membranes, BP (119-166)/(58-78) 124/64. BUN 16. Can encourage the patient to 
maintain a healthy diet and adequate hydration.
2. Seizure - less likely, as the patient was not post-ictal, did not bite their tongue, and was 
not incontinent of urine or stool.
3. Vasovagal syncope - less likely, given the absence of prolonged standing or emotional 
distress, painful stimuli, and prodromal symptoms such as nausea, warmth, and 
diaphoresis.
4. Situational syncope - less likely, given the absence of triggers such as cough or 
defecation.
5. Orthostatic syncope - less likely, as there were no postural changes in HR/BP after 
standing suddenly. However, age-related changes could be a factor, or transient 
orthostatic 2/2 Trazadone
6. Aortic stenosis - less likely, as the patient did not have exertion prior to the syncopal 
episode. TTE with normal EF and LV.
7. Arrhythmia - less likely, as there is no history of heart disease, and EKG without
arrhythmia
8. Sick sinus syndrome, bradyarrhythmia, AV block - less likely, as the EKG did not show 
any increased PR or QRS interval.
9. Torsades - less likely, as there is no hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia.


10. Cerebellar stroke - While it can be argued that given the patient’s symptoms of dizziness 
prior to and after her episode of syncope may be due to acute CVA, or vertebrobasilar 
insufficiency, it is far less likely, especially given the lack of atherosclerotic risk factors 
such as long standing HTN, HLD, or smoking in this patient. However, the US Carotid 
Duplex Bilateral showed mild carotid disease. Nonetheless, this patient received a work 
up including CT Head and MRI brain, MRA head and neck which were negative for 
hemorrhage or infarct, and stenosis or occlusion, respectively. 
#headache and left eye swelling/ecchymosis
- It is possible the patient is suffering from a concussion after hitting her head. Patient 
advised to limit mental concentration including watching TV and limiting cell phone use
until symptoms improve. With improvement patient advised to increase daily activity 
gradually to the point of tolerance without symptoms. Participation in light activity such 
as walking is advised and shown to provide faster recovery time.
#left wrist pain
- Xrays negative for fracture. Likely a sprain/strain. Will keep in brace for stabilization and 
given Tylenol 650 mg PRN for pain.