
* History provided by patient himself who is a reliable historian.
CC: abdominal pain and decreased output from ostomy
HPI:
82 y.o. male with PMHx of stage lIB colon cancer with four previous small bowel obstructions 
and multiple previous abdominal surgeries which include right hemicolectomy 6/2022, 
exploratory laparotomy for ischemic colitis secondary to SMA stenosis and distal SMA 
thrombosis, resection of the ileocolonic anastomosis, and end ileostomy. Since being diagnosed 
with colon cancer in 2018 the patient has been admitted to the hospital on four separate 
occasions for bowel obstruction, all of which were managed conservatively with bowel rest and 
NGT placement. He has been doing well since his last SBO in Jan. 2023 until earlier this 
morning around 3 AM he reports sudden onset abdominal pain around his ostomy. He describes 
the pain as constant sharp and stabbing – 8/10 in severity. The pain does not radiate nor is it 
better or worse with anything in particular. He has not tried taking any medication for the pain. 
The patient reports nausea and 1 episode of non-bilious vomiting. He also reports that since the 
onset of pain there has been decreased output in his ostomy bag. No blood in ostomy bag. He 
states that everything was fine the day prior to the onset of pain. He had been eating and drinking 
like normal and he emptied his ostomy like he typically does. He states that the symptoms he has 
been experiencing resemble his previous SBOs so he came to the hospitalization for evaluation.
The patient has not had fever or chills. No recent weight loss.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:
Colon cancer (s/p chemo in 2018 and right hemicolectomy in 2022)
Small bowel obstruction (1/2023, 9/2022, 4/2022, 2/2021)
Parastomal hernia of ileal conduit
Atrial fibrillation
HLD
DVT / Pulmonary embolism (4/2022)
Atrial septal defect and mitral stenosis
TIA
CAD
BPH
PAST SURGICAL HISTORY:
Colonoscopy, right hemicolectomy (2018), ileostomy 2018 - Ex lap, small bowel resection with
end ileostomy and SMA Stent for Mesenteric Ischemia
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Patient has never smoked cigarettes. Drinks 7 glasses of wine per week. No other drug use such 
as marijuana, heroin, or cocaine. Patient is married with 4 adult children. He is a retired cable 
splicer. 
FAMILY HISTORY:
Mother with stroke – passed away in her early 80s.
Father with heart failure – passed away in his late 70s.
Patient is unaware of either his sister’s or brother’s medical conditions and his children are all in 
good health.


MEDICATIONS:
amiodarone 200 mg tablet
apixaban 2.5 mg tablet
atorvastatin 40 mg tablet
finasteride 5 mg tablet
multivitamin tablet
magnesium oxide 400 mg tablet
ALLERGIES:
No known allergies to medications, food, or environmental stimuli.
ROS:
CONSTITUTIONAL: See HPI.
HEENT: No changes in vision and hearing.
RESPIRATORY: No SOB and cough.
CV: No palpitations and CP.
GI: See HPI.
GU: No dysuria and urinary frequency.
MSK: No myalgia and joint pain.
SKIN: No rash and pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: No headache and syncope.
PSYCHIATRIC: No recent changes in mood. No anxiety and depression.
VITALS:
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) -
Temp: [36.5 °C (97.7 °F)-37 °C (98.6 °F)] 37 °C (98.6 °F)
Heart Rate: [79-98] 94
Resp: [16-20] 16
BP: (128-166)/(62-86) 136/81
SpO2: [92 %-98 %] 93 %
Height - 1.778 m (5' 10")
Weight - 109 kg (240 lb)
Body mass index is 34.44 kg/m².
PHYSICAL EXAM:
GENERAL: Alert and oriented x 3. No acute distress. Ill appearing.
EYES: EOMI. Anicteric.
HENT: Moist mucous dry. No scleral icterus. No cervical lymphadenopathy.
LUNGS: Clear to auscultation bilaterally to all lung fields. No rhonchi or wheezing. No 
accessory muscle use. Breath sounds equal bilaterally. Normal percussion.
CARDIOVASCULAR: Regular rate and rhythm. No murmur. No JVD.
ABDOMEN: + bowel sounds. Soft, with mild distention in the epigastric region. Tenderness to 
palpation around stoma site located in the right periumbilical region, without erythema or 
overlying skin changes. No rebound, rigidity or guarding. Ostomy with light brown liquid 
consistency stool. No palpable masses. Nontender liver. Liver 11cm at midclavicular line and 
7cm at midsternal line. Palpable 1cm below the right costal margin. Non palpable spleen.
EXTREMITIES: No edema. Non-tender.
SKIN: No rashes or lesions. Warm.
NEUROLOGIC: No focal neurological deficits. CN II-XII grossly intact, but not individually 
tested.
PSYCHIATRIC: Cooperative. Flat affect.


LABS:
WBC 9.29 (N)
Hct 39.6 (N)
Hb 12.4 (L)
MCV 90.8 (N)
Na+ 140 (N)
K+ 3.7 (N)
HCO3- 23 (N)
Cr 1.2 (N)
Ca+ 9.11 (N)
Glucose 185 (H)
Anion gap 14 (N)
T. bili 1.1 (N)
ALT 26 (N)
AST 33 (N)
Alk phos 127 (H)
Albumin 4 (N)
Lipase 23 (N)
Lactate 1.2 (N)
Mg 1.8 (N)
IMAGING, EKG, AND OTHER STUDIES:
XR Chest 1 View
Clear lungs.
Distended small bowel loops compatible with obstruction.
CTA Chest Abdomen Pelvis with and Without Contrast
Prior right colectomy. Mildly dilated small bowel loops, to the level of the right lower quadrant 
ileostomy. Suspected small bowel obstruction, at the level of the ileostomy. Suspected distal 
rectal tumor. Left pelvic lymphadenopathy, highly likely malignant.
EKG – Sinus rhythm with premature atrial complexes; left axis deviation without ST or T wave 
abnormalities.
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
82 y.o. male with PMHx of stage lIB colon cancer with previous small bowel obstructions and 
multiple previous abdominal surgeries which include right hemicolectomy 6/2022, exploratory 
laparotomy for ischemic colitis secondary to SMA stenosis and distal SMA thrombosis, resection 
of the ileocolonic anastomosis, and end ileostomy. PMHx also includes PAD, carotid stenosis 
complicated by CVA, paroxysmal afib, PE/DVT (on Eliquis), CVA. The patient presented after 
sudden onset mid abdominal pain around ostomy with decreased ostomy output with findings 
concerning for SBO on CTA abdomen. 
#Acute onset abdominal pain #SBO
Patient presenting with signs and symptoms of small bowel obstruction – sudden onset 
abdominal pain and distention, without peritonitis, and decreased output from ostomy. PE with
epigastric tympany and distention. Pain to light palpation around stoma site. Patient reports that 
his symptoms are similar his previous SBOs. Differential diagnoses include paralytic ileus, 


bowel perforation, diverticulitis. Given imaging findings of proximal dilated small loops of 
bowel and decreased output from ostomy, SBO is most likely. Less likely ileus as there is 
evidence of obstruction on imaging with proximal to obstruction bowel distention, not diffuse.
Bowel perforation would likely present with peritonitis. Imaging without signs of diverticulitis 
and patient is afebrile and has a normal WBC. SBO showed on CTA AP at the level of the 
ileostomy. CXR demonstrating distended small bowel loops consistent with SBO. Lactate 1.2, 
which is reassuring for absence of ischemic bowel. Etiology of SBO likely secondary to 
adhesions from multiple previous abdominal surgeries or malignancy burden as imaging showed 
suspected distal rectal and left pelvic lymphadenopathy. Patient with history of parastomal hernia 
which could also contribute to an obstruction, but hernia is not currently present on abdominal 
exam or imaging.
Surgery was consulted and deemed patient is a good candidate for conservative management at 
this time. Will place NGT and keep patient NPO. Will monitor NGT output closely. His pain is 
being managed with standing IV Tylenol and morphine 1 mg IV for severe pain. Avoiding 
opioids to prevent reduced Gl motility. Patient has Zofran 4 mg q6h PRN for nausea.
#Goals of care
Patient’s code status is DNR/DNI and he has had multiple SBOs within the last year without 
clear etiology. Patient would like to discuss with palliative care inpatient given his colon cancer 
and recurrent hospitalizations. 
#Normocytic Anemia
Hb 12.4; MCV 90.8, consistent with anemia of chronic disease likely 2/2 malignancy burden vs 
possibly 2/2 bleed. Patient without signs or symptoms of active bleed such as dizziness or 
lightheadedness, blood in stool or vomit, shortness of breath or paleness, or low BP or 
tachycardia, more like anemia of chronic disease. Will monitor and if <7 will consent patient for 
transfusion.
#Paroxysmal afib
Patient with normal rate and rhythm. Patient's CHA2DS2Vas score = 6. Managed at home on 
Eliquis 2.5 mg BID and amiodarone 200 mg daily. In setting of conservative SBO management 
patient switched to heparin gtt and amiodarone IV while patient is NPO.
Patient will remain on telemetry monitoring for arrythmia.
#Distal SMA thrombosis
#PE/DVT
Hypercoagulable state likely 2/2 malignancy. No current signs of DVT or PE or other VTE – no 
leg edema, pain or redness; no shortness of breath or tachycardiac; patient satting well on RA. 
Will continue to monitor vitals.
Patient on eliquis 2.5 mg BID at home for history of VTE events -- managing here with 
anticoagulation as listed under afib problem. SCDs for ppx as well.
#Rectal Adenocarcinoma
#Hx of stage lIB colon cancer
The patient was diagnosed with colon cancer in 05/2018 and is s/p right hemicolectomy and 
Xeloda chemotherapy (2018). Patient had an abnormal PET scan (05/22) with hypermetabolic 
pelvic mesenteric LN and nodular uptake in anterior wall of the rectum. He was also found to 


have a rectal nodule (11/22) and pathology results were concerning for rectal adenocarcinoma. 
His CEA levels were elevated 11/22: 10.04 --> 12.84. CT scan here with suspected distal rectal 
and left pelvic lymphadenopathy. Patient is being follow by Astera oncology and outpatient 
palliative and is pending a PET scan. No further oncological consultation/intervention necessary 
inpatient.
#BPH
Patient has not had symptoms concerning for active complications secondary to BPH – no 
retention or difficulty with urine stream. Holding home finasteride 5 mg in setting of bowel rest 
and decompression for SBO resolution.
#HLD
Holding home atorvastatin in setting of bowel rest and decompression for SBO resolution
VTE Prophylaxis: heparin gtt
Diet - NPO
Code Status- DNR/DNI
Clinical question: What is first line therapy for treatment of colon cancer?
A meta-analysis from 2011 in the journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology 
demonstrated that capecitabine-based chemotherapy has a significantly superior progression-free 
survival, equivalent overall survival, and comparable response rate with 5-flurouracil-based 
chemotherapy.
P – patients with metastatic colorectal cancer
I – capecitabine-based chemotherapy
C – 5-FU as a chemotherapy agent
O – efficacy and safety in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer
The study found that patients taking capecitabine-based chemotherapy have an overall higher 
response rate and longer progression-free survival compared to those receiving other 
chemotherapy regimens. The adverse effects were also less in comparison, noted as being mild to 
moderate in severity. Using additional targeted therapies, such as bevacizumab or cetuximab in 
conjunction with capecitabine-based chemotherapy may lead to even better outcomes. It is 
important to note that continuous monitoring of the patient’s response to therapy is vital to 
optimizing outcomes.
1. Ling W, Fan J, Ma Y, Ma Y, Wang H. Capecitabine-based chemotherapy for metastatic 
colorectal cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. Jun 2011;137(6):927-38. doi:10.1007/s00432-010-
0954-0