
H&P Week 1
SUBJECTIVE: 
CC: “I am short of breath and have a cough”
HPI: 
Patient is a 64yoF with a past medical history of COPD, atrial fibrillation, HFpEF, DM, diabetic 
neuropathy, anxiety, depression and bipolar disorder who presented with shortness of breath and 
cough with productive green sputum which began 3 days ago. On Friday evening (7/29/22), patient 
became short of breath while waking from her bed to the bedroom door. At baseline, patient is able to 
walk approximately 1-2 blocks before becoming short of breath. Patient also notes cough with 
productive green sputum. Patient has a history of productive cough, but at baseline her sputum is whitegrey. She also endorses associated headache, chills and episodic chest pain which is “crushing-stabbing”
in quality and graded 7/10 on graded pain scale. The chest pain is gradually improving and Percocet 
(Oxycodone- acetaminophen 5-325 mg) markedly improves severity of pain, graded 3/10 on Percocet. 
Patient frequently has “COPD attacks”, which she describes as episodes of shortness of breath and 
cough that occur almost nightly. She denies associated chest pain during these episodes. Patient does 
not report any associated triggers and notes these episodes resolve gradually after inhaler. Her COPD is 
managed by her PCP, which she last saw 1 month ago. She is maintained on fluticasone furoatevilanterol and ipratropium/albuterol inhalers daily. Patient has been hospitalized for COPD 
exacerbations approximately 4x in the past year.
Patient is a former smoker of 40 pack years and quit approximately 3 months ago. 
Patient notes 4-5 month history of discomfort and pressure with urination. Denies dysuria, urgency or 
frequency. Currently maintained on purewick, but symptoms occur both at home and in hospital. 
Patient has completed multiple courses of antibiotics for these symptoms in the past, without 
improvement. Patient is not currently followed by GYN. 
Patient was treated in ED for presumed COPD exacerbation and received Dexamethasone 80 mg, 
prophylactic antibotics (1 dose of ceftriaxone and azithromycin), and started on Ipratropium 
Bromide/Albuterol (Duo-Neb) 3 ml inhaler Q4H. Patient was saturating 100% on 3L NC. Routine labs and 
sputum culture were drawn. ProBNP, troponins, and chest x-ray were within normal limits. No evidence 
of acute myocardial infarction noted on EKG. 
ROS: 
 Constitutional: Denies fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, night sweats, or recent weight 
changes. 
 Head/Eyes/Ears: + Headache, lightheadedness. Denies trauma, LOC, confusion, vision or hearing 
changes.
 Mouth: Denies sores in mouth, dental pain, bleeding gums or sore throat. 
 Cardiac: + Mild chest pain. Denies palpitation. 
 Pulmonary: + SOB, wheezing, coughing.
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
 Gastrointestinal: Denies nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, acid reflux, constipation. 
 Genitourinary: Denies urinary frequency, change in color, hematuria, dysuria or incontinence.
 Rheumatologic/Musculoskeletal: Denies joint pain, swelling, or tenderness. 
 Neurologic: + Headache, tremors. Denies gait problems, weakness, numbness, memory changes, 
or confusion. 
 Dermatologic: Denies rashes, pruritus, lesions and any hair or nail changes. 
 Psychiatric: + Anxiety. Denies depression. 
PMH: 
 COPD – hospitalized for 4 exacerbations in the past year. Maintained on fluticasone furoatevilanterol and ipratropium/albuterol inhalers daily. 
 HFpEF – most recent echo 7/8/22 showed EF of > 55%. Maintained on Lisinopril, Carvedilol and 
Empagliflozin.
 Atrial fibrillation – Rate but not rhythm controlled. Maintained on Diltiazem and Eliquis. 
 Diabetes Mellitus – most recent HbA1c of 7.7% on 5/11/22. Maintained on Metformin and 
Empagliflozin, well controlled. 
 Diabetic Neuropathy – Maintained on Gabapentin, well controlled. 
 Hypertension - Maintained on Lisinopril, Carvedilol and Diltiazem, well controlled. 
 Bipolar Disorder – Maintained on Aripiprazole, well controlled. 
 Anxiety – Maintained on Lorazepam as needed, well controlled. 
 Depression – Maintained on Duloxetine, well controlled.
 Spinal Stenosis/Chronic pain – CT on 4/2022 noted spinal stenosis of lower lumbar spine. 
Maintained on Percocet for chronic leg pain.
PSH: 
 Hernia repair 20 years ago. 
Medications: 
 Apixaban (Eliquis) 5 mg BID
 Aripiprazole 20 mg QD
 Atorvastatin 40 mg QD
 Benzonatate 100 mg Q8hrs prn for cough 
 Carvedilol 25 mg BID
 Colace (docusate sodium) 100 mg BID
 Duloxetine 30 mg QD
 Empagliflozin 10 mg QD
 Fluticasone furoate – vilanterol 100-25 mcg 1 puff daily
 Gabapentin 100 mg Q8hrs
 Ipratropium/albuterol sulfate 3 ml Q4hrs
 Lisinopril 5 mg QD
 Lorazepam 1 mg in morning prn, 1 mg at bedtime prn 
 Oxycodone- acetaminophen 5-325 mg Q4hrs for severe pain
 Pantoprazole 40 mg QD
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
Allergies: 
 Codeine
 Dextroamphetamine
 Nitroglycerin
 Risperidone
 Tramadol
 Amphetamines
 Ketorolac
FH: 
 Father , deceased at age 68, history of myocardial infarction, diabetes and hypertension.
 Mother, alive at age 88, history of hypertension. 
 Remaining family history is noncontributory. 
SH: 
 Patient never married. Lives at home with sister, feels safe in her home. 
 Currently retired. Previously worked in warehouse, no occupational hazards reported. 
 Patient is post-menopausal, LMP at age 50. Patient is not regularly followed by GYN. Last 
mammogram was 10 years ago, reportedly normal. 
 Patient has a healthy diet and eats home cooked meals. Patient does not participate in routine 
exercise. 
 Patient has a previous smoking history of 40 pack years (1 pack per day for 40 years) and quit 3
months ago. 
 Patient drinks alcohol socially, on average 2 alcoholic drinks per week. 
 Patient does not use any recreational drugs. 
OBJECTIVE: 
Physical Exam: 
Vitals: 
8/1/22 – BP 117/57, HR 90, RR 20, T 98.1, SpO2 100% on 3L NC
General appearance: Patient is not in apparent distress, ill-appearing, toxic-appearing or 
diaphoretic. Patient is obese.
HEENT: No scalp lesions. No sinus tenderness. No conjunctival pallor. Pupils equal/round, reactive to 
light. Visual fields and extraocular muscles intact. Normal hearing bilaterally and tympanic membrane. 
Trachea midline. No thyroid gland enlargement or nodules. No carotid bruits. No JVD. No 
lymphadenopathy.
Lungs: Expiratory wheezes in all lung fields. No rales or rhonchi. 
Heart: Irregularly irregular rate and rhythm. Normal S1 and S2. No murmur, rubs or gallops. 
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
Abdomen: Normal bowel sounds. Abdomen is soft, non tender and non distended. No aortic or renal 
bruits. 
Neurologic: Alert and oriented x 3. Muscle strength 5/5 bilaterally in upper and lower extremities, no 
focal weakness. Diminished sensation of bilateral toes to the dorsum of the feet, otherwise sensation 
intact. Proprioception intact. Cerebellar function intact. No pronator drift. 
Extremities: No UE edema. Trace pitting edema in bilateral LE. 
Peripheral Pulses: Diminished DP and PT pulses. Normal radial pulses. 
Skin: Skin is warm and dry. Capillary refill < 2 seconds. Chronic venous stasis changes up to the knees –
mild erythema and 1 cm scabbed lesion in right shin, 2x 1.5 cm scabbed lesions on left shin. 
Results: 
Labs: 
Recent Labs
Lab Units 07/31/22
2020
WBC AUTO 10*3/uL 10.79*
HEMATOCRIT % 29.5*
HEMOGLOBIN g/dL 8.8*
PLATELETS AUTO 10*3/uL 202
MCV fL 86.0
RDW-CV % 16.5*
Recent Labs
Lab Units 07/31/22
1835
SODIUM mmol/L 138
CHLORIDE mmol/L 100
POTASSIUM mmol/L 4.00
CO2 mmol/L 28.2
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
BUN mg/dL 13
CREATININE mg/dL 0.6
CALCIUM mg/dL 9.0
ANION GAP mmol/L 10
Troponins from 7/31/22: 11
Pro-BNP from 7/31/22: 2.546 pg/dL
U/A from 7/31/22: U/A - 1+ blood, 2+ protein, 1+ leukocytes, > 182 WBCs, 12 RBC HPF, rare 
bacteria. 
Viral panel from 7/31/22: negative for COVID, influenza A, B, RSV. 
Blood Cultures from 7/31/22: Pending. 
Labs from 8/1/22: 
BMP – glucose elevated 290, otherwise wnl 
CBC – low RBC, Hb (9.6), Hct (32.9), low MCH and MCHC, RDW-CV and RDW-SD -
otherwise nl CBC Differential – low lymphocytes, monocytes and eosinophils otherwise 
wnl 
Imaging: 
CXR 7/31/22: Impression - within normal limits 
EKG: 7/31/22: Impression - ABNORMAL ECG: atrial fibrillation with competing junctional 
pacemaker; ST and T wave abnormalities consider lateral ischemia. 
Summary: 
Patient is a 64yoF with a past medical history of COPD, atrial fibrillation, HFpEF, DM, diabetic 
neuropathy, anxiety, depression and bipolar disorder who presented with dyspnea on exertion and 
cough with productive green sputum 3 days ago. On exam, patient is noted to have irregularly irregular 
rhythm, tachycardic, currently saturating 92% on 3L NC, expiratory wheezes in all lung fields and 
bilateral LE edema. Labs significant for hemoglobin 9.6, mild leukocytosis 10.79. Negative troponins and 
viral respiratory panel. U/a significant for sterile pyuria. EKG negative for acute myocardial infarction. 
CXR negative for pneumonia. Patient was admitted to the medicine service. 
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
Assessment/Problem:
#Acute exacerbation of COPD
Patient was previously hospitalized for COPD exacerbations 4x within the past year, able to walk < 1 
block before becoming SOB, and FEV1 less than 50% predicted at baseline - consistent with COPD GOLD 
D grade. For this admission, patient presented with dyspnea on exertion and cough with productive 
green sputum 3 days ago, consistent with COPD exacerbation. Infectious workup for pneumonia 
including CXR and respiratory culture were unremarkable. Acute coronary syndrome workup including 
EKG and troponins were unremarkable. Although proBNP positive, HFpEF exacerbation less likely as CXR
and pulmonary exam negative for fluid overload. 
- To improve lung function and hypoxemia, will start course of Prednisone 40 mg PO QD for 5 days 
- Continue Ipratropium Bromide/Albuterol (Duo-Neb) 3 ml q4h
- To reduce treatment failure and mortality, will continue prophylactic antibiotics - Azithromycin 500 
mg/24hrs and Ceftriaxone 1 g/24 hrs for 5 days 
- To improve oxygenation, will continue supplemental O2 at 3L NC, goal saturation 88-92%
- If patient becomes hypercapnic, develops respiratory acidosis or tachypneic (RR > 25), will consider 
initiating noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. Hold off for now. 
- To evaluate further for infectious etiology, will proceed with blood culture and procalcitonin. 
- Will consider pulmonary rehabilitation following clinical improvement of acute exacerbation of COPD
- Patient was previously maintained on regimen of SAMA + LABA + ICS. For prevention of further 
exacerbations, will consider discharging on regimen of LAMA + LABA + ICS as per criteria of COPD GOLD 
D grade.
#Sterile Pyuria
UA on admission significant for elevated WBCs > 182, 1+ leukocytes, rare bacteria, negative nitrites. 
Patient reports 4-5 month history of discomfort and pressure with urination. Patient presentation most 
concerning for pelvic organ prolapse. Other differential includes UTI, although less likely as patient 
denies dysuria, urgency or frequency. Medical irritation of external urinary catheter is unlikely due to 
chronic history of symptoms that occur both at home and in previous hospitalizations.
- Patient is not currently followed by GYN. Recommend outpatient GYN evaluation for pelvic organ 
prolapse.
- To evaluate for urinary obstruction, will proceed with post-void residual volume testing with a bladder 
ultrasound.
- Will proceed with urine culture to evaluate further for UTI. If urine culture is positive, to consider 
increase in dose of ceftriaxone vs starting 5 day course of nitrofurantoin pending sensitivities of urine 
culture. 
#HFpEF
Patient's most recent echo on 7/8/2022 showed EF > 55%. Maintained on Lisinopril and Carvedilol.
Although positive proBNP on labs from 7/31/22, patient does not exhibit symptoms or signs of overt 
fluid overload. 
- Continue Lisinopril 5 mg QD and Carvedilol 25 mg QD.
- If patient exhibits signs or symptoms of fluid overload, such as crackles or worsening LE edema, will
give dose of Lasix 20 mg QD. Will subsequently monitor I/Os and kidney function on BMP. 
Submitted Fri 8/5/2022 11:00 PM
#Anemia
Hb was 8.8 on admission, now 9.6. On previous hospital admission 1 month ago, Hb was 10.1. 
- Repeat CBC and trend Hb. 
- Check iron studies and ferritin. 
#Atrial Fibrillation
Currently in Afib, but patient asymptomatic and heart rate within normal limit. Clinically stable on 
Diltiazem and Apixaban (Eliquis). 
- Continue Diltiazem 120 mg QD and Apixaban (Eliquis) 5 mg QD. If patient becomes symptomatic or 
tachycardic, to consider metoprolol for rate control
#Hypertension
Clinically stable on regimen of Carvedilol, Diltiazem and Lisinopril. 
- Continue Carvedilol 25 mg QD, Diltiazem 120 mg QD and Lisinopril 5 mg QD
#Diabetes Mellitus
Elevation in glucose on BMP. Maintained on Metformin and Empagliflozin.
- In order to minimize disruption of metabolic state and avoid glycemic events, will discontinue 
metformin and initiate insulin sliding scale – Insulin Glargine 5 units at bedtime, Insulin Lispro 2-10 units 
4 times daily (meals and bedtime). Continue Empagliflozin 10 mg QD. 
#Diabetic Neuropathy
Stable neuropathic pain in bilateral toes. Currently maintained on Gabapentin.
- Continue Gabapentin 100 mg Q8h
#Spinal stenosis/Chronic Pain
Spinal stenosis of lower lumbar spine noted on CT 4/2022. Patient maintained on Percocet for chronic 
leg pain. 
- Continue Oxycodone-Acetaminophen 5-325 mg Q4hrs prn
#Anxiety
Normally maintained on Lorazepam 1 mg morning, 2 mg bedtime at home.
- Continue maintenance dose as per primary recommendations
#Bipolar Disorder
Maintained on duloxetine and aripiprazole.
- Continue duloxetine 30 mg QD and aripiprazole 20 mg QD