
*History provided by patient herself who is a reliable historian
CC: progressively worsening shortness of breath for 1 week.
HPI: 73 y.o. female with past medical history significant for HTN, HLD, HFrEF (Echo: 2/10/23 
EF: 40-45%), afib on Eliquis, and Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. The patient has been feeling well
on her current HF medications until she was recently admitted to RWJ Somerset on February 8, 
2023 for shortness of breath and she was found to have a decreased EF of 35%. She was 
transferred to Englewood Hospital at the time, where she underwent a cardiac catheterization that 
showed normal coronary arteries with a reduced EF consistent with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
versus tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy. Upon discharge, her cardiologist discontinued her 
diltiazem, flecamide, HCTZ, and potassium chloride. The patient continued to do well until 
about a week prior to admission where she describes a progressive onset of shortness of breath 
with wheezing. She states that her symptoms have continued to worsen and that last night they 
were at their worst, so she decided to come to the ED for evaluation. She also reports that she
hasn’t been able to lay flat at night without feeling short of breath. She uses 3-4 pillows to prop 
herself up. She has not been waking up in the middle of the night gasping for air. Patient 
regularly uses her CPAP machine at nighttime and she states that her “numbers have been bad 
this week because the machine was showing a red sad face.” She also reports that she has gained 
6 lbs over the last week and reports that her legs have been swollen. She has not experienced any 
other symptoms such as chest pain, palpitation, fever, chills, abdominal pain, or recent illness.
Hospital Course:
She was evaluated by the ED physician and was found to have an elevated proBNP at (8,760) 
and a chest x-ray that was consistent with pulmonary vascular congestion. Her EKG revealed Afib with RVR, was started on Cardizem drip. In the ED, she received furosemide 40 mg IV in ED 
and was admitted to the internal medicine service for further management. 
ROS:
CONSTITUTIONAL: no fever and chills. See HPI
HEENT: no changes in vision and hearing.
RESPIRATORY: see HPI
CV: See HPI
GI: no abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.
GU: no dysuria and urinary frequency.
MSK: no myalgia and joint pain.
SKIN: no rash and pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: no headache and syncope.
PSYCHIATRIC: no recent changes in mood. Denies anxiety and depression.
PMHx: afib on Eliquis, CHF, HLD, HTN, OSA
SurgHx: Cardiac ablation 2020

Medications:
• apixaban (Eliquis) 5 mg tablet Take 1 tablet (5 mg total) by mouth in the morning 
and 1 tablet (5 mg total) in the evening.
• atorvastatin (Lipitor) 20 mg 
tablet
TAKE 1 TABLET DAILY (Patient taking 
differently: Take 4 tablets (80 mg total) by mouth 1 
(one) time each day.)
• carvediloL (Coreg) 12.5 mg 
tablet
Take 1 tablet (12.5 mg total) by mouth 2 (two) times 
a day with meals.
• coenzyme Q-10 200 mg capsule Take 1 capsule (200 mg total) by mouth 1 (one) time 
each day.
• furosemide (Lasix) 20 mg tablet Take 1 tablet (20 mg total) by mouth 1 (one) time 
each day.
• losartan (Cozaar) 25 mg tablet Take 1 tablet (25 mg total) by mouth 1 (one) time 
each day.
• multivitamin tablet Take by mouth.
• Poly-Iron 150 Forte 150-25-1 
mg-mcg-mg capsule
Take by mouth 1 (one) time each day.
• sertraline (Zoloft) 100 mg tablet Take 2 tablets (200 mg total) by mouth 1 (one) time
each day.
• spironolactone (Aldactone) 25 
mg tablet
Take by mouth 1 (one) time each day.
• empagliflozin (Jardiance) 10 
mg
Take 1 tablet (10 mg total) by mouth 1 (one) time 
each day.
Allergies:
Latex – rash (since 1/27/2020 - high severity rash); shellfish (since 12/12/2022 – anaphylaxis); 
iodine (since 12/7/2017 - high severity rash)
SocHx: patient has never smoker tobacco, vaped, or used recreational drugs such as heroin, 
cocaine, or marijuana. Patient drinks alcohol socially – 2-3x glasses of wine per week.
FamHx: mother passed at 82 yo, but patient is unaware of her medical problems; father passed 
at 79, but patient is unaware of her medical problems. Patient is an only child and has no 
children
VITALS: 
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) -
Temp: [36.6 °C (97.8 °F)-36.8 °C (98.3 °F)] 36.8 °C (98.3 °F)
Heart Rate: [57-102] 64, irregularly irregular rhythm
Resp: [16-22] 18
BP: (115-177)/(57-104) 118/82
SpO2: [87 %-96 %] 93 %
O2 Delivery Method: BiPAP / CPAP
O2 Flow Rate (L/min): [2 L/min-4 L/min] 2 L/min
Height - 1.651 m (5' 5")
Weight - 70.2 kg (154 lb 12.2 oz)
Body mass index is 25.75 kg/m².

I/O last 3 completed shifts:
In: 311 (4.4 mL/kg) [I.V.:261.2 (3.7 mL/kg); IV Piggyback:49.8]
Out: 1350 (19.2 mL/kg) [Urine:1350 (0.5 mL/kg/hr)]
Weight: 70.2 kg
No intake/output data recorded.
PHYSICAL EXAM:
GENERAL: Alert and oriented x 3. Well-nourished.
EYES: EOMI. Anicteric.
HENT: Moist mucous membranes. No scleral icterus. No cervical lymphadenopathy.
LUNGS: minimal increased work of breathing. Wet crackles at the bases bilaterally. Breath 
sounds decreased at lung bases bilaterally. Minimal dullness to percussion at the bases 
bilaterally. No accessory muscle use.
CARDIOVASCULAR: irregularly irregular rate and rhythm. S1 and S2 auscultated. No S3 or
S4. Without murmur, rubs, or gallops. No JVD.
ABDOMEN: Soft, non-tender and non-distended. No palpable masses. Liver palpated just 
below the costal margin - nontender and soft on palpation. Spleen not palpable.
EXTREMITIES: Bilateral trace, non-pitting pedal edema. Non-tender.
SKIN: No rashes or lesions. Warm.
NEUROLOGIC: No focal neurological deficits. CN II-XII grossly intact, but not individually 
tested.
PSYCHIATRIC: Cooperative. Appropriate mood and affect.
Labs:
Pro-BNP - 8760
Cr 1.24
WBC 9.8
Hb 11.3
MCV 70.9
IMAGING, EKG, AND OTHER STUDIES:
CXR - The lungs demonstrate diffuse perihilar airspace disease. The pulmonary vasculature is 
prominent and ill-defined. The cardiopericardial silhouette is enlarged even for portable 
technique. There are no mediastinal or pleural abnormalities. 
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
73 yo F with PMHx of HTN, HLD, takotsubo cardiomyoptahy, HFrEF (2/10/23 echo EF 40-
45%) and afib who presented to the ED yesterday morning with dyspnea, wheezing, weight 
gain. She was found to have wet crackles and dullness to percussion at the lung bases 
bilaterally, and bilateral trace pedal edema on physical exam, and labs reveals an elevated proBNP, and pulmonary congestion was noted on CXR. Patient has received multiple doses of lasix 
and fluid restriction in the hospital and been responsive to treatment with symptomatic and 
hemodynamic improvement.

#acute decompensated HF
Assessment:
The cumulation of the patient’s shortness of breath, wheezing, weight gain, wet crackles, 
dullness to percussion, pedal edema, elevated pro-BNP, and pulmonary congestion suggest 
acute decompensated heart failure. Her acute exacerbation of systolic LV function is likely due 
to her afib vs idiopathic vs worsening HF anemia vs volume overload from too much 
hydration vs medication nonadherence. According to Opasich C. et al 40-50% of cases of acute 
decompensate HF are idiopathic in nature1
so that could also be possible in this patient. Patient
had a recent echocardiogram on 2/10/23 which showed an EF 40-45%. It is possible that her EF 
has worsened since this evaluation, although there were no inciting events to suggest that this 
occurs. A follow up TEE would help to determine this, although we will hold off as other 
etiologies are higher on the differential at this moment. She reports that she does drink a lot of 
water and likes to stay hydrated so she may have been taking on more water lately leading to 
this exacerbation. The patient states that she has been taking her medications as prescribed so 
medication nonadherence is less likely.
Plan:
Patient is receiving 20 mg lasix IV and strict I/Os (1.5 L/day). We are monitoring urine output –
goal of 1-1.5 L diuresis/day. Can increase if shortness of breath returns. Need to be cautious and 
monitor CMP in particular to watch potassium in the setting of potent diuretic use and creatinine 
given her recent fluid restriction and given her arrythmia and hypokalemia and Cr. 
Continue home CPAP machine at night with usual settings. Continue home meds: per 
cardiology recs Lasix 20 mg - can increase to bid; can increased carvedilol (from 12.5 to) 25 mg 
bid. Continue Jardiance (empagliflozin), spironolactone, losartan and normal doses. Counsel 
patient on diet, low sodium intake, decreasing oral fluid intake and daily weight.
#afib
ECG 2/28 revealed afib with RVR. She is scheduled for ablation in March in Englewood 
hospital.
- IV cardizem started here for rate control and patient remains rate controlled in the 50-74; if 
patient remains bradycardic for long periods of time or if becomes fatigued, experiences 
presyncope or syncope, dyspnea on exertion, or oliguria will need to titrate dose
- carvedilol was increased to 25 mg bid, per cardiology recs; will need to decrease if patient 
becomes symptomatic as described earlier
- remain on telemetry to monitor rhythm and RVR
- CHAD2DS-VASc score 4 -> should be on AC for stroke prevention -> Eliquis 5 mg
#anemia
Microcytic anemia Hb 11.3; MCV 70.9. Likely due to iron deficiency anemia vs anemia of 
chronic disease. Will order iron studies - ferritin, serum iron, TIBC, and % saturation to confirm. 
If iron low and TIBC high -> IDA -> can give ferrous sulfate 65 mg PO qod
#takotsubo's cardiomyopathy
Cardiac catheterization February 2023: Normal coronary arteries; Left ventricular ejection 
fraction 35% with apical dyskinesia; Elevated pulmonary artery pressures
- no acute changes or treatment other than medications (see other problems)
#HTN
Patient remains normotensive in the hospital - 102/65-119/79 on home regimen - Cozaar 25 mg 
daily (losartan), Spironolactone 25 mg daily, Coreg 12.5 mg twice daily. Plan to continue the 
following medications and continue regular BP monitoring at home.

#HLD
Plan to continue home medication – lipitor 80 mg daily – patient can follow PCP for further 
management.
EBM:
Clinical question: Why is a patient with CHF being treated with a SGLT2 inhibitor?
Jardiance (empagliflozin) has recently (2021) been shown to reduce the composite CV death and 
hospitalization in patients with worsening heart failure. The EMPEROR-Preserved trial is a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that investigated whether empagliflozin 
reduces rates of cardiovascular death or worsening heart failure in patients with reduced EF, with 
or without diabetes.2
P – 5988 patients with class II-IV heart failure and ejection fraction >40%
I – empagliflozin (10 mg qd)
C – placebo, in addition to usual therapy
O – composite of cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart failure
The primary outcomes of the study demonstrated that patients taking empagliflozin had reduced 
risk of CV death or hospitalization for heart failure in patients with HF compared to placebo. The 
reduction in risk was seen in all patients, with or without diabetes. Empagliflozin was found to 
be safe and well-tolerated with no significant difference in adverse events compared to placebo. 
In addition to the primary outcome of the trial several secondary outcomes were measured and 
include the following: Empagliflozin reduced the risk of worsening heart failure compared to 
placebo, renal outcomes including a decline in eGFR and the development of end-stage renal 
disease, and all-cause mortality compared to placebo. NYHA functional class (measure of 
severity of heart failure symptoms) and quality of life as measured by the Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire were improved. Lastly, there was no significant improvement in 
LVEF compared to placebo in the experimental group. There were some limitations to the study 
such as the duration of follow up only being approximately 2.5 years, which may not be 
sufficient to truly assess the long-term effects and safety of the drug in this population. 
Additionally, there may have been subgroups excluded or unrepresented in the study population 
making the study less generalizable. Furthermore, the mechanism of action of how empagliflozin 
improves outcomes in HF is not fully understood and more research is still needed.
1. Joseph SM, Cedars AM, Ewald GA, Geltman EM, Mann DL. Acute decompensated heart 
failure: contemporary medical management. Tex Heart Inst J. 2009;36(6):510-20. 
2. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin in Heart Failure with a Preserved 
Ejection Fraction. N Engl J Med. Oct 14 2021;385(16):1451-1461. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2107038