Date: 10/11/2020
Referral Source: ED
Data Source: Patient (unreliable), Patient’s son (reliable), ED physician note (reliable), Primary 
care physician (reliable), and outpatient records (reliable)
Chief Complaint: Confusion and dysuria, for two days
Mr. B is an 81 yo male with a PMH of recurrent urinary tract infections, hypertension, diabetes, 
chronic renal failure, bladder cancer post resection and adjuvant chemo (2018), colon cancer 
post resection (2003), Immune thrombocytopenia being treated with prednisone and 
rituximab, presenting for confusion and dysuria for two days. Patient is currently alert, awake, 
but confused about his past medical and social history. Mr. B was apparently well until two days 
prior to admission, when he started feeling a burning sensation and noticed a foul smell while 
peeing, suprapubic pain, and groin pain. He reports feeling lightheaded currently and feeling 
dizzy while standing. This started with his urinary symptoms. He reports weight loss, loss of 
appetite and states that he has not been drinking as much water as he should be. He does not 
have fevers, chills, headaches or hematuria. He reports normal bowel movements without 
diarrhea or bloody stools. He has had 10 UTIs in the past year with his most recent in August 
when he was admitted to St. Peter's and transferred to a rehab facility upon discharge, where 
he has been living for six weeks prior to admission.
His past medical history is notable for low grade posterior wall urothelial cancer posttransurethral resection and adjuvant chemo due to lung metastasis in 2018, colon cancer postleft hemicolectomy in 2003, and Immune Thrombocytopenia for which he has been taking 
prednisone on and off for 20 years. As per his primary doctor, Mr. B has been taking prednisone 
for 6 months prior to admission and during this time, experienced hypotension with blood 
pressures in the 80-70s SBP and 50s DBP. However, follow up with an ACTH stimulation test 
yielded negative results. He was then treated with hydrocortisone, midodrine, and
Fludrocortisone, but this regimen was ineffective, and he gained 40lbs in water weight that 
required diuresis with Torsemide. He was restarted on hydrocortisone and midodrine however 
six weeks prior to admission. He consulted Nephrology two weeks prior to admission for his 
hypotension and has yet to schedule and appointment with Endocrinology.
In the ED, one day prior to admission, his vitals were BP 103/52, HR 66, RR 16, T 97°F, and 96% 
saturation on room air. Labs ordered by ED were notable for WBC 14.6, and urinalysis showed 
2+ protein, 1+ blood, >182 WBC, >97 RBC, lactate 1.5, and 3+ leukocyte esterase, although his 
PCP states that he is always positive for Leukocyte esterase. ED ordered Ceftriaxone 1gm IVPB 
and NaCl 0.9% Bolus 1L IV. Mr. B was admitted to the medicine floor.
Past Medical History
Colon Cancer - dx 2003, status post L hemicolectomy and adjuvant chemo. Metastasis to lung 
post-resection in 2009. Latest colonoscopy in 2019 was normal. CEA in 1/2020 was 6.0, 5/2020 
was 5.1.
Bladder Cancer - low grade posterior wall urothelial bladder, cystoscopy with biopsy in 2/2020 
negative for malignancy
Thyroid nodule- stable on US
Pulmonary Embolism - 2/2015, finished course of Rivaroxaban
Steroid induced Diabetes Mellitus - last HbA1c on 8/2019 was 6.1
Recurrent Immune Thrombocytopenia
Bladder Diverticula, largest measuring 9cm
Osteoporosis
Atherosclerotic Heart Disease - last catherization in 2003 with EF=55%; 30% proximal LAD 
lesion; normal nuclear stress test in 2019
Hypertension
Sciatica
Psoriasis
Past Surgical History
See HPI and PMH
Splenectomy for splenomegaly
Cholecystectomy
Medications
Hydrocortisone Tablet 5 mg by mouth two times a day (home meds)
Hydrocortisone Tablet 5 mg by mouth every 24 hours (home meds)
Midodrine 5 mg by mouth daily at 7 am (home meds)
Albuterol-Ipratropium 
Tamulosin 0.04mg, once daily
Allergies/Sensitivities
Gentamicin - acute renal failure
Diprivan- unknown
Augmentin- unknown
Family History
Mother - died from complications of heart disease and diabetes
Father - died from stroke
Social History
Smoked 1ppd for 20years, quit in 1978. Drinks alcohol socially. Retired sales representative. 
Wife died in 2015 from lymphoma. 4 kids.
Pt usually lives in Fl and gets treatment there, has been in NJ (son lives here) for the last 6 
months. Family sees multiple doctors and specialists.
Review of Systems:
General: recent weight loss, decreased appetite, no fevers orchills
HEENT: No headaches, no syncope
Heart: no chest pain or palpitations
Resp: No cough, shortness of breath
GI: See HPI, no diarrhea or constipation
GU: See HPI
Skin: No rashes
Neuro: See HPI
Heme: No easy bruising/bleeding
MSK: lower back pain, neck pain with movement, pain in the back of the heels, no lower 
extremity pain
Physical Exam
T: 98.2, HR: 72 and regular rhythm, BP: 74/40, RR: 16, SpO2: 98% 
Gen: patient is in no acute distress and lying down in bed
HEENT: NCAT, anicteric sclera without conjunctival injection, MMM
Cardiac: normal S1/S2, no murmurs, rubs or gallops
Lungs: crackles at the base of the lungs
GI: Soft, RLQ LLQ and suprapubic area tender to light palpation, no organomegaly, normal 
bowel sounds
GU: not assessed
Ext: 1+ lower extremity edema
Neuro: unaware of any medical history but attentive. AAOx3, knew he was in a hospital, not 
which one and knew the year. Screened negative on delirium. 5/5 strength in all extremities
Labs
2 x Troponin T: 0.02 [10/10 @ 22:04, 18:53 ]
Labs ordered by ED: See HPI
Imaging
10/10/2020 20:00 Chest 2 Views (PA/LAT or AP/LAT)
IMPRESSION: No radiographic evidence of acute cardiopulmonary disease.
10/11/2020 08:51 EKG 12 Lead AdultVentricular Rate 57BPM
Atrial Rate 53BPM
QRS Duration 58ms
Q-T Interval 404ms, QTC Calculation(Bezet) 393ms
R Axis 85degrees, T Axis 55degrees
Diagnosis: UNDETERMINED RHYTHM, NONSPECIFIC ST ABNORMALITY
ABNORMAL ECG WHEN COMPARED WITH ECG OF 30-JUL-2020 16:35,
CURRENT UNDETERMINED RHYTHM PRECLUDES RHYTHM COMPARISON
ST ELEVATION NOW PRESENT IN INFERIOR LEADS
ST NO LONGER ELEVATED IN LATERAL LEADS
07/30/2020: CT
Pancreas: The pancreas appears abnormal with diffuse ductal dilatation and multiple cystic 
lesions. The differential diagnosis includes malignancy.
Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder: There is diffuse, irregular thickening of the bladder wall with a 
differential diagnosis which includes chronic outlet obstruction, infection, and/or malignancy. 
There is mild associated infiltration of the perivesical fat. A couple of left bladder diverticula are 
noted, the larger measuring roughly 9 cm. No hydronephrosis. Occasional tiny renal stones 
bilaterally.
Summary
Mr. B is an 81 year old male with past medical history of recurrent UTI, bladder cancer post 
resection in 2018, colon cancer post left hemicolectomy and chemo treatment in 2003 
complicated by lung metastasis needing resection in 2009, immune thrombocytopenia on 
chronic intermittent steroids for 20 years, presenting for dysuria and confusion for 2 days.
Patient has a past medical history of hypotension for six months as well. Review of systems is 
pertinent for dysuria, a foul smell associated with urination, suprapubic pain, groin pain, 
lightheadedness, dizziness while standing, weight loss, and loss of appetite. Physical exam is 
pertinent for hypotension, crackles at the base of the lungs, RLQ LLQ and suprapubic area 
tender to light palpation, and 1+ lower extremity pitting edema. Labs show low K+, high BUN, 
high WBC, low HgB, low Hct, low platelets. Most likely etiology is adrenal insufficiency 
secondary to long-term prednisone use.
Assessment and Plan 
1. Hypotension 
a. Highest on the differential for hypotension and a diagnosis that must be ruled 
out is an adrenal crisis due to tertiary adrenal insufficiency caused by 20 years off 
and on with prednisone use being more consistent in the six months prior to 
admission. Taking glucocorticoids (GC) can lead to suppression of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis which can present with hypotension, 
weight loss, and hypokalemia. A 2015 meta-analysis that reported at rates of 
adrenal insufficiency following corticosteroid treatment, based on systematic 
review of 47 studies with 3,753 patients, found that in patients taking low 
(<10mg) dose oral corticosteroids, risk was 2.4%, for patients taking 
corticosteroids for more than 1 year, the risk was 27.4%, and for patients taking 
oral corticosteroids, the risk was 48.7% (Leonie H. A. Broersen, Alberto M. 
Pereira, Jens Otto L. Jørgensen, Olaf M. Dekkers, Adrenal Insufficiency in 
Corticosteroids Use: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, The Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology & Metabolism, Volume 100, Issue 6, 1 June 2015, Pages 2171–
2180, https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2015-1218). 
b. Next on the differential is septicemia which may be due to systemic spread of his 
urinary tract infection, however septicemia that progresses to septic shock 
presents with tachycardia, not a part of this patient’s presentation. Dehydration 
due to acute infection, polyuria, and history of insufficient water intake is 
supported by a high BUN level, however IV NS boluses given in the ED did not 
correct the hypotension. Lastly, CHF needs to be ruled out as a cardiogenic cause 
of hypotension and is on the differential due to the presence of hypertension, 
atherosclerotic heart disease, and EF: 55%. 
c. Plan:
i. Consult endocrine because of his history of steroid use and because the 
patient continues to be hypotensive despite fluid boluses. Follow-up with 
a random cortisol and thyroid function tests to assess for adrenal 
function. Low cortisol and high TSH might point to adrenal insufficiency. 
Next step would be to repeat the ACTH stimulation test.
ii. Order an echocardiogram and proBNP to rule out CHF
iii. Hold further IV fluids due to crackles being present on lung exam
iv. Continue hydrocortisone 5mg once daily and midodrine 5mg once daily 
(home meds)
2. Confusion
a. Mr. B presents with classic symptoms of UTI. Labs ordered by ED show WBC 
14.6, and urinalysis showed 2+ protein, 1+ blood, >182 WBC, >97 RBC, lactate 
1.5, and 3+ leukocyte esterase. However, his UTI could be complicated by 
bladder and kidney abnormalities shown on the CT (diffuse irregular thickening 
of the bladder wall, left bladder diverticula, and occasional tiny renal stones). 
Consult urology - since patient has had 10 UTIs in the past, consider whether 
there is a urinary obstruction or any role for prophylaxis antibiotics.
b. Continue Ceftriaxone Injection 1 gm i.v. piggyback every 12 hours
c. Follow up with blood and urine cultures and sensitivity and lactate levels to rule 
out septic shock
d. Per PCP, Mr. B is at baseline mental status currently. Assess his mental status 
daily to monitor for change. 
3. Immune thrombocytopenia 
a. Mr. B has a history of immune thrombocytopenia previously managed with 
prednisone on/off for 20 years, temporarily held for Rituximab treatment, and 
then restarted 6 months prior to admission.
b. Patient currently has low RBC, HgB, HCT, platelets - could be due to dilution post 
IV NS bolus. Monitor.
c. Order haptoglobin, LDH, reticulocyte count, CBC
4. Benign prostatic Hyperplasia
a. Hold home meds because of hypotension
5. Diabetes
a. Insulin Lispro (HumaLOG) Sliding Scale. subcutaneous before each meal and 
bedtime
F: none
E: replete
N: NPO
P: enoxaparin
Dispo: med-surg, tele
Code: FULL