
Internal Medicine History and Physical Examination – Week 6
Patient Name: Mr. A
Date: 9/1/2022
Referral Source: ED
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Subjective
Chief Complaint:
“I have a fever and a sore throat”. 
HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS:
Mr. A is a 39 y.o. male with a history of TB (s/p treatment in DR 2006) who presented with 2 
week history of fevers and dysphagia. Patient was in his normal state of health until 2 weeks 
ago when he developed nausea, non-bilious non-bloody vomiting and gas-like epigastric pain, 
which he attributes to food he ate at work. He also reports an associated 15 lbs weight loss 
over 2 weeks due to decreased food intake in setting of dysphagia to solid foods, resorting to
only eating soup and other liquids. In addition, the patient "walked in the rain" several days ago 
and subsequently developed fevers, chills, non-productive cough, and phlegm in chest. Patient 
notes taking an herbal remedy (unclear specific name) without significant improvement. 
Otherwise, no chest pain, shortness of breath, diarrhea, palpitations, dizziness, headache, GI or 
urinary incontinence, rashes or visual changes reported. 
The patient does not report any recent travel or sick contacts. He believes his symptoms may 
be due to dust from the warehouse he works in, although no other coworkers have reported 
similar symptoms. In addition, he believes his symptoms may also be due to developing cold 
after walking in the rain several days ago. 
Of note, the patient immigrated from the Dominican Republic 3 years ago and does not have a 
PCP or seen a provider since his move. He is planning on receiving a private health insurance in 
10/2022. 
On admission, patient was found to be febrile to 102 an HIV positive on rapid HIV test. Labs 
were within normal limits and chest x-ray was negative acute infection. 
Patient does not report any risk factors for HIV including maternal HIV infection while in-utero,
IV drug use, frequent unprotected intercourse, or previous sexual partners with history of HIV. 
The patient has one tattoo on his left forearm, which he received in tattoo parlor in DR. 
Otherwise, patient unaware of source of infection.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:
TB - diagnosed and treated in 2006 in DR. Patient presentation and exact treatment was 
unclear. 
PAST SURGICAL HISTORY:
No surgical history reported.
Submitted Wed 2022 09 07 10:31 pm
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Patient immigrated from Dominican Republic 3 years ago. 
Patient is not married. 
Patient lives in a home in NB with son, 11 years-old. 2 other residents (non-family members)
also live in the home. 
Patient works in warehouse- dusty conditions but the facility is reportedly new. No 
occupational exposures. 
Patient never smoked. Patient does not report prior or current use of recreational drugs, 
including intravenous drugs.
Patient does not report prior or current use of alcohol. 
Patient reports 3 female sexual partners during his lifetime, last reported sexual activity 1.5 
years ago. Patient reportedly had unprotected sex with 1 long term female partner, although he 
has 3 children with 3 different women. Patient is not aware of any of his partner's being 
diagnosed with STIs.
FAMILY HISTORY:
Patient's father died at age 72, history of diabetes mellitus. 
Patient's mother is 68 years-old and has no known medical history. 
Patient's brother has diabetes mellitus. 
Patient’s 3 sons are alive and well. 
No other family history reported.
HOME MEDICATIONS:
Herbal supplements – unclear of exact supplement. 
No other medications or supplements reported.
ALLERGIES:
No known drug allergies. 
ROS:
Constitutional: See HPI.
HEENT: No recent trauma, LOC, headache, confusion, changes in vision, vertigo, tinnitus or 
lightheadedness reported. 
Resp: See HPI.
CV: No chest pain, tightness, palpitations.
GI: No abdominal pain, reflux, constipation, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hematochezia or 
melena reported. 
GU: No dysuria, urgency, frequency, incontinence reported. 
Neuro: No syncope, slurring of speech, neck stiffness, numbness or tingling or gross motor or 
sensory deficits. 
Psych: No depression, anxiety or stress reported.
Musculoskeletal: No joint pain, swelling, erythema reported.
Submitted Wed 2022 09 07 10:31 pm
Objective
VITALS:
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) 
Temp: [36.6 °C (97.8 °F)-38.9 °C (102 °F)] 36.6 °C (97.8 °F)
Heart Rate: [79-103] 79, regular 
Resp: [18] 18
BP: (124-140)/(76-79) 124/76
SpO2: [98 %] 98 %
PHYSICAL EXAM:
General appearance: Patient is well developed and nourished. Patient is not in apparent 
distress. 
HEENT: No scalp lesions. Pupils equal/round, reactive to light. Visual fields and extraocular 
muscles intact. No conjunctival pallor. Normal hearing bilaterally and tympanic membrane. Oral 
thrush. No sinus tenderness. Trachea midline. No thyroid gland enlargement or nodules. No 
carotid bruits. No lymphadenopathy.
Cardiac: Regular rate and rhythm. No murmurs, rubs or gallops.
Lungs: Clear to auscultation, wheezes or crackles. 
Abdomen: Active bowel sounds. Abdomen is soft, non-tender, non-distended.
Extremities: Normal radial and distal pulses. No lower extremity edema.
Skin: Warm and dry. No rashes. 
Neuro: Alert and oriented. Able to follow 3-step commands. Cranial nerves intact. Sensory and 
proprioception intact. Muscle strength 5/5 bilaterally in upper and lower extremities.
LAB:
Recent Labs
Lab Units 09/01/22
1136
WBC AUTO 10*3/uL 4.52
HEMOGLOBIN g/dL 13.3
HEMATOCRIT % 38.9
PLATELETS 
AUTO
10*3/uL 149
Recent Labs
Lab Units 09/01/22
1136
SODIUM mmol/L 138
POTASSIUM mmol/L 4.30
CHLORIDE mmol/L 100
CO2 mmol/L 25.5
BUN mg/dL 10
Submitted Wed 2022 09 07 10:31 pm
CREATININE mg/dL 0.8
CALCIUM mg/dL 9.1
TOTAL 
PROTEIN
g/dL 8.0
BILIRUBIN 
TOTAL
mg/dL 0.4
ALK PHOS U/L 78
ALT U/L 17
AST U/L 47
GLUCOSE mg/dL 102*
Latest 
Reference 
Range & Units
Most 
Recent
Lipase 15 - 75 U/L 24
09/01/22 
11:36
Latest 
Reference 
Range & Units
Most 
Recent
Covid19 Not Detected, 
Invalid, 
Inconclusive 
Not 
Detected
09/01/22 
11:36
Blood cultures from 9/1/22: PENDING
IMAGING, AND OTHER STUDIES:
XR Chest 1 View
Narrative: EXAM: XR CHEST 1 VIEW
CLINICAL INDICATION: cough;
TECHNIQUE: A single view of the chest was obtained.
COMPARISON: None
Impression: Postsurgical changes/Catheters and Support Devices:
None. 
Lungs/Pleural Spaces:
No focal infiltrates. Costophrenic angles are clear.
Submitted Wed 2022 09 07 10:31 pm
Heart/Mediastinum:
Heart size borderline. Trachea and mediastinal structures are midline. 
Other:
No other significant findings.
Summary:
No evidence of acute cardiopulmonary pathology.
FINAL RESULT BY: Henry Notardonato MD DICTATED: 9/1/2022 12:38 PM
EKG from 9/1/22: Normal sinus rhythm.
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
Patient is a 39 yo male with history of TB (s/p treatment in DR 2006) who presents with 2 week 
history of fevers, chills, non-productive cough, phlegm in chest, dysphagia with solid foods, oral 
thrush, and found to be HIV positive on HIV rapid test upon admission.
#Fever
Patient presented with 2 week history of constitutional symptoms and febrile to 102 on 
admission. Exam notable for oral thrush. Labs within normal limits. Infectious workup with CXR 
and u/a negative. In the setting of new HIV diagnosis and unknown suppressive state, viral 
infection likely. Fever secondary to candidemia likely. Bacteremia also likely. 
- To evaluate infectious source further, will proceed with blood cultures. Will also follow up on 
urine cultures.
#Esophagitis
#Dysphagia
Patient reports dysphagia to solid foods and found to have oral thrush on exam. Given HIV 
positive status, most concerning for candida esophagitis. Structural obstruction also likely. Viral 
esophagitis secondary to CMV or HSV also likely. 
- Proceed with candida PCR.
- Will also check EBV and CMV to evaluate for other infections commonly associated 
with HIV immunosuppressed patients. 
- Proceed with Fluconazole 200 mg PO BID for 7 days. 
- Given SDOH, patient will be discharged today. Hold off on GI consult for EGD.
#HIV
On admission, patient found to be HIV positive. Patient does not report any risk factors for HIV 
including maternal HIV infection while in-utero, IV drug use, frequent unprotected intercourse, 
or previous sexual partners with history of HIV. The patient has one tattoo on his left forearm, 
which he received in tattoo parlor in DR. Otherwise, patient unaware of source of infection.
- Proceed with CD4 count and HIV viral load. 
Submitted Wed 2022 09 07 10:31 pm
- Since patient is being discharged, proceed with outpatient care at EB Chandler Clinic for 
HAART therapy. Patient has appointment scheduled with Dr. Jacobs 9/6/22.
- Counseled patient on importance of following up with outpatient clinic and receiving 
care for new HIV diagnosis. Patient is aware of risks of not treating HIV. 
- Counseled patient on contacting previous partners regarding HIV status. Patient states he is 
unable to contact previous sexual partners as they are all in DR. 
#Social Determinants/Dispo
Patient arrived to ED with son and does not have a family member or contact to care for son if 
patient were to be hospitalized. Patient is adamant about being discharged from hospital today 
for this reason. If patient is unable to be discharged, he explicitly stated he will leave against 
medical advice.
- Given patient’s situation, will proceed with safely discharging patient today. 
- Reviewed the importance of being able to contact the patient via phone-call to discuss 
lab results and inform of any critical values. Patient is aware that if he is found to have 
bacteremia, he will need to return to the hospital immediately for treatment.
- Reviewed the importance of following up at EB Chandler Clinic for treatment of newly 
diagnosed HIV. Patient confirmed that he will be able to attend appointment. 
 