History and Physical Examination
Patient Name: 
Date: 5/2/2021
Referral Source: Emergency Department
Data Source: Patient, reliable
Chief complaint: 8 months of yellowing of the eyes.
History of Present Illness: Patient is a 59-year-old female from Chile with no known medical history who
presents with 8 months of scleral icterus. Patient saw her primary care provider, Evelyn Javier, an NP in 
Perth Amboy in early May and got blood work done. Results showed elevated transaminases and 
patient was told to come to ED. Patient says she has noticed that her abdomen has felt more distended 
over the past few weeks. She does not report abdominal pain, chest pain, shortness of breath, visual 
disturbances, fever, chills, pruritus, diarrhea, or vomiting, and no bowel or bladder changes. She said she 
did not know if she had ever had hepatitis or a hepatitis vaccine. CMP showed AST of 185, ALT of 163, 
alkaline phosphatase of 736, bilirubin of 3.5 with direct bilirubin 2.2, protein of 9 and albumin of 3.7. All 
other bloodwork was unremarkable. Patient got RUQ ultrasound which was limited by contracted 
gallbladder but showed adenomyomatosis and right renal cysts. CT abdomen was performed and 
showed nonspecific mild pericholecystic fluid and trace LLQ ascites.
Past Medical History:
None
Past Surgical History:
None
Medications:
None
Allergies:
None
Family History:
Mother: Deceased. T2DM, Unspecified Liver Disease
Father: Not known to the patient
Patient does not have any siblings
There is no family history of cancer
Social History
Patient smokes approximately 12-13 cigarettes per day 
Patient has never drunk alcohol
Does not use illicit drugs
Works for a cleaning service
Patient is married to her husband of 30 years
Housing situation is secure and patient lives with husband
No food insecurities
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: See HPI
HEENT: Reports no headache, ear pain, tinnitus
Cardiovascular: See HPI
Respiratory: See HPI
Gastrointestinal: See HPI
Genitourinary: See HPI
MSK: She reports no muscle pains or weakness
Skin: Patient does not report rashes, petechiae, purpura, bumps, or bruises. 
Psych: Patient does not report depression, anxiety, SI/HI
Physical Exam:. 
Vitals: Temp 97.2 (oral), HR 71 and regular rhythm, BP 127/72, RR 15 and not labored, SPO2 98% on 
room air
General: Well appearing female appearing stated age in no apparent distress.
Skin: Mildly bronze appearing skin
HEENT: Normocephalic and atraumatic. Pupils equally round and reactive to light. Scleral and sublingual 
icterus present. No tenderness to palpation in the nasal sinuses. No erythema, post nasal drainage, or 
discoloration of the throat. 
Neck: No cervical lymphadenopathy. No palpable masses. Trachea midline.
Pulm: Lungs are clear to auscultation. No crackles/rales/wheezes/rhonci. Bilateral resonance to 
percussion. Normal tactile fremitus. 
Cardiac: Normal S1 and S2. Regular rhythm. No rubs, murmurs, or gallops.
GI: Abdomen is nontender, slightly distended, no fluid wave, no palpable masses, and bowel sounds are 
present in all four quadrants and are normal. The liver span is approximately 8 cm and there is no 
splenomegaly.
Extremities: There is no edema. 5/5 strength in Bilateral upper and lower extremities. Reflexes 2+ 
bilaterally in Upper and lower extremities. 
Neuro: Alert and oriented x3. Sensation to light touch and pinprick is intact. Sensation to vibration and 
proprioception is intact. 
Psych: Normal affect. Very pleasant and cooperative. 
Labs & Imaging:
Na: 138, K: 4.0, Cl: 105, HCO3: 24.2, BUN 21, Cr: 0.9, Ca: 9.2
WBC: 7.2 / Hb: 13.1 / Hct: 38 / Plt: 225 
-Diff: N: 55.9% L: 31.8% Mo: 8.4.% Eo: 2.1% Baso: 1.8%
AST: 156 / ALT: 148 / AlkPhos: 678 / Bili: 3.2 / Prot: 8.3 / Alb: 3.2 
PT: 10.9 / PTT: 38.2 / INR: 0.97
AMA, ANA: Negative 
Abdominal RUQ US: Contracted gallbladder limiting evaluation. Adenomyomatosis. Right renal cysts.
CT Abdomen/Pelvis W/Contrast:
1. Minimal micronodular hepatic contour with recanalized umbilical vein, concerning for mild hepatic 
cirrhosis with portal hypertension.
2. Contracted gallbladder with nonspecific mild pericholecystic fluid, which may be related to 
hepatocellular disease. 
3. Small pelvic ascites. Trace left lower portion of abdominal ascites.
4. Multilevel lumbar spondylosis including L2-L3 moderate-large broad-based central disk extrusion 
with caudad migration contributing to at least moderate spinal canal stenosis. Further evaluation with 
nonemergent lumbar spine MRI without contrast may be obtained, as clinically warranted.
Abdominal MRI: Moderate Cirrhosis of the Liver
Assessment
Patient is a 59-year-old female originally from Chile who has no known PMH presenting to the ED with 8 
months of jaundice and recent abdominal distension. On arrival, blood work showed elevated 
transaminases and hyperbilirubinemia with low albumin levels. RUQ US showed Contracted gallbladder. 
Adenomyomatosis. Right renal cysts. CT suggested mild hepatic cirrhosis which was confirmed on MRI.
1. Jaundice and Abdominal distension
Patients elevated direct bilirubin levels suggest that there could be a hepatitis. Viral hepatitis is less 
likely because the patient has not recently traveled, does not use IV drugs, and has been with the same 
partner for over 20 years. Additionally her LFTs would likely be higher. Alcoholic hepatitis does not fit 
this patient because she has never drank alcohol. Patient could also have a gallbladder issue, as noted by 
her Alk phos of 678 and calculated R-factor below 2, which suggests biliary issue. However, RUQ 
ultrasound, CT, and MRI failed to show stones in the gallbladder and also did not show calcifications. 
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma presents with painless jaundice, which fits this patients presentation. 
However, this can be ruled out by the patients imaging. Hepatocellular carcinoma could also present 
similarly to this patients presentation. However, again, this can be ruled out by her imaging. Given the 
patients age, she could have PBC, but she does not report and pruritus which is a common symptom and 
her AMA was negative. Patient could have auto-immune hepatitis but she does not have other history of 
autoimmune disorders. She could be suffering from Wilson’s disease but this is less likely given that she 
has no neurological manifestations. Given the patients mothers history of liver failure and diabetes, 
patient could also have hereditary hemochromatosis. Given the testing already performed on the 
patient, the most likely cause is idiopathic cirrhosis. 
Plan:
1. Jaundice and Abdominal Distension
Patient should be tested for HAV, HBV, and HCV immediately. Patient should also be immunized against 
HAV, HBV, and HCV given her cirrhosis. We should also test patient for anti-smooth muscle antibody 
which could cause an auto-immune hepatitis. We should order serum ceruloplasmin to test for Wilson’s 
disease. We should also order iron studies and ferritin to assess the likelihood that she would have 
hereditary hemochromatosis. Additionally, I would like to order GGT to make sure that her elevated Alk 
phos is biliary and not from another etiology given that it does not currently fit what we have seen on 
imaging. 
