
*History provided by patient and mom at bedside
CC: severe upper mid abdominal pain for 6 days
HPI: This is an otherwise healthy 34-year-old female who presented at 2 AM this morning to the 
ED for evaluation of constant epigastric pain that started 6 days ago. 6 days prior to admission 
she states that after she drank concentrated apple juice she developed epigastric pain. She 
reports that the pain has been constant over the past 6 days, waxing and waning in severity, 
and is most severe after meals. She reports that the pain radiates to her back and describes it 
as 10/10 in severity at its worst. To relieve the pain, she smokes marijuana (see amount in 
social history) which provides some relief to a severity of 4-5/10. She has not taken any other 
medication for the pain. The pain has interrupted her sleep over the past 6 days and 3 days 
prior to admission she describes an instance where she woke up and was covered with sweat. 
She reports nausea which is associated with the pain when it is severe, but no vomiting. She 
states that she has never had pain like this before. She reports a history of heartburn over the 
last “several years”, but says this pain is different than the discomfort and burning she 
experiences with that. The patient also notes that her stool has been pale-yellow in color and 
her urine is bright yellow – both things she has not experienced prior to 6 days ago.
ROS: 
CONSTITUTIONAL: no weight loss, fever and chills.
HEENT: no changes in vision or hearing.
RESPIRATORY: no SOB or cough.
CV: no palpitations or CP.
GI: (+) abdominal pain, nausea, pale stool. No vomiting or diarrhea.
GU: no dysuria or urinary frequency.
MSK: no myalgia or joint pain.
SKIN: no rash or pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: no headache or syncope.
PSYCHIATRIC: no recent changes in mood. No anxiety or depression.
PMHx:
Migraines since she was a “young girl” that have not bothered in for “sometime now”
SurgHx:
No past surgeries.
Medications:
Patient does not take any prescription or over-the-counter medication, nor supplementals or 
vitamins.
Allergies:
No known allergies to drugs, food, latex, or environmental exposures.
Emma Idzikowski IM H&P1 Submitted February 19, 2023 7:36 am
Social Hx:
Smokes marijuana – “one bowl per day after work”. When she stays home from work, she 
reports taking “a few puffs a couple of times an hour”.
Consumes alcohol – a few glasses of wine 2-3x per week.
Does not use other drugs such as cocaine or heroin.
Patient works as a 911 dispatcher for the county.
She lives alone in an apartment.
FamHx:
Mother and maternal grandmother with breast cancer.
No known medical problems on paternal side.
Patient does not have any children or siblings.
PE:
Vitals – T 36.9C (98.4F), HR 81 – regular rhythm, RR 17, BP 113/88, 98% RA
Constitutional:
 Thin appearing female, resting comfortably in bed. In no distress.
HENT: 
 Head: Normocephalic. 
 Mouth: Mucous membranes are moist and anicteric.
Eyes: 
 Pupils: Pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light. Sclera anicteric.
Cardiovascular: 
 Rate and Rhythm: Normal rate and regular rhythm. 
 Pulses: Normal pulses. 
 Heart sounds: Normal heart sounds. 
Pulmonary: 
 Effort: Pulmonary effort is normal. 
 Breath sounds: Normal breath sounds. 
Abdominal: 
 General: Abdomen is flat. There is no distension or tympany.
 Tenderness: There is abdominal tenderness. There is no guarding. 
 Comments: Epigastric tenderness to deep palpation. Liver span 4.5 cm midsternal line; 7 cm 
midclavicular line
Musculoskeletal: 
 General: Normal range of motion. 
Skin:
 General: Skin is warm. 
 Capillary Refill: Capillary refill takes less than 2 seconds. 
 Coloration: Skin is not jaundiced. 
Neurological: 
 General: No focal deficit present. 
 Mental Status: She is alert and oriented to person, place, and time. Mental status is at 
baseline. 
Psychiatric: 
 Mood and Affect: Mood normal.

Labs:
WBC 8.19
Hgb 14.3
Plt 157
ALT 227 > 200
AST 415 > 392
Alk Phos 93 > 107
Lipase 45
Imaging:
US abdomen RUQ –
Cholelithiasis, without definite sonographic evidence of cholecystitis. However, given findings 
on same-day CT, further evaluation with a nuclear medicine HIDA scan could be obtained to 
evaluate for cystic duct patency.
CT Abdomen Pelvis with contrast -
Cholelithiasis with minimal gallbladder wall thickening and diffuse wall hyperenhancement. 
There is mild pericholecystic fluid noted adjacent to the cystic duct. The common bile duct 
measures 6 mm in diameter. Findings overall are suggestive of acute cholecystitis. 
Recommend further evaluation with right upper quadrant ultrasound.
Left adnexal lesion measuring up to 2.8 cm, could represent hemorrhagic cyst however 
dedicated pelvic ultrasound with Doppler is recommended for further evaluation.
A/P:
This is an otherwise healthy 34-year-old female who presented to the ED for epigastric pain 
radiating to her back for the past 1 week and pale stools. ED workup revealed elevated AST, 
ALT, Tbili, gallstones on CTAP and RUQ US, concerning for choledocholithiasis. GI has been 
consulted and patient is schedule for an ERCP tomorrow.
#Epigastric pain
#Elevated AST, ALT, Tbili
#Cholelithiasis
Given the presence of gallstones and subsequently elevated AST, ALT and T bili we are 
concerned for choledocholithiasis with possible concern for cholecystitis provided the CTAP 
demonstrating gallbladder wall thickening, enhancement, and mild pericholecystic fluid. 
However, it is encouraging that her WBC is normal and she remains afebrile. Patient will have 
an ERCP done tomorrow which will help to identify any stones that are stuck in the CBD causing 
obstruction and they will subsequently be removed with possible stent placement. With her 
uptrending T bili (3.4 > 4.4) we will continue to monitor for obstruction and check after her 
ERCP. Her UA was positive for bilirubin, but the patient does not have jaundice at the current 
moment. Nonetheless, it is reassuring that her CBD is 6mm, on the upper end of normal as this 
does not indicate a major, continuous obstruction. It is also reassuring that her lipase (=45) is
within normal limits, suggesting against an episode of acute pancreatitis. Another differential 
diagnosis to consider is cholangitis, but in the setting of being afebrile, alert, and normotensive 


this is much less likely. We may also think about Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, however with in 
the presence of gallstones being the primary suspicion for the cause of intermittent 
obstruction, this may be less likely.
For symptomatic management we will give Zofran 4 mg PRN for nausea and vomiting and 
Toradol 15 mg PRN for pain. Once the patient’s acute presentation including AST, ALT, and T bili 
are resolved she will likely need to follow up with surgery for a cholecystectomy in the next 2-3 
weeks. In the interim patient will remain NPO starting at midnight tonight for her ERCP 
tomorrow.