

First, again I want you to know that I appreciate your sending me the H&P very promptly. It helps me manage my time.
Second, although your initial H&P had many strengths, this one shows growth over that very good beginning. My
comments, which also include some constructive suggestions, follow:
1. I am delighted that you began with specific lines for the informant and the informant's reliability.
2. I am delighted that you included the duration of the chief complaint.
3. This patient, at age 95, has a pretty extensive past history, some of which merges with the present illness. It was very
skillful of you to summarize the relevant parts of the past history in the introductory phrases of the history of present
illness. This helps set the stage for the most recent events, which are indeed separate from but potentially related to the
current problem.
4. Your use of chronology to determine where to put various events is very appropriate and done with finesse.
5. Given the respiratory nature of the events of the present illness, it would have been ideal to include the history of
influenza and COVID vaccinations in the history of present illness.
6. It is appropriate that you mentioned the history of heart failure in the sisters. It would have been more complete to
indicate if they are still alive, what the nature of their heart diseases is, and their ages if alive or the ages at which they
died.
7. Your handling of the absence of other material in the ROS is reasonable. Another way to do it might be: See HPI;
otherwise non-contributory. (There may be some institutions that may prefer that you still enumerate each system and
then say that there are no positive symptoms. Some computer programs prefer that.)
8. In the past medical history, you need not include what is already mentioned in the present illness. As for the
hypothyroid history, it might be more complete to indicate that she is now euthyroid on supplemental thyroid hormone.
9. In mentioning the breast surgeries, it might be more complete to indicate whether there was post-op radiation or
chemotherapy.
10. I personally would not have repeated in the past surgical history what is already mentioned elsewhere.
11. I note that she is on a beta blocker eye drop; but you don't mention anywhere that she has glaucoma. That is the
usual indication for these drops.
12. I want to commend you very enthusiastically for including the manifestations of the patient's allergies. This is very
important to enable the reader to distinguish between allergy and intolerance.. (Indeed, some people use the heading
"Allergies and Intolerances".)
13. In the social history, it would be more complete to indicate how long she has been widowed.
14. In the family history, it would be more complete to include both parents. Given the patient's age, I would assume that
both parents have died, and it would be appropriate to indicate their ages at death and causes of death.
15. It is not clear whether the patient's sisters are still alive.
16. It would be best to include the children in the family history, with their ages, gender, and state of health.
17. I am one of the people who likes to include the description of the rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs. (By the
way, when it is atrial fibrillation, it is a good practice to indicate where you measured the heart rate: at the apex or at a
peripheral pulse. With atrial fibrillation these rates differ because some of the systoles occur before the ventricle has filled
up enough to generate a palpable pulse in the periphery when it empties. In fact, the combination of an irregularly irregular
rhythm and a pulse deficit [difference between apical and peripheral rate] is pathognomonic for atrial fibrillation! You don't
need an electrocardiogram, usually, to determine the presence of atrial fibrillation.)
18. I am amazed and delighted that you actually looked into her ear canals!
19. In this patient, with her cardiac history, it would have been appropriate to look for a hepatojugular reflux, especially
given her rather large liver span. But I am pleased that you noted an increased degree of jugular venous distention.
20. It is not meaningful to describe the PMI as "non-displaced". It would be better to indicate how far from the midsternal
line it is and in which intercostal space. I will attach some slides about this.
21. A liver span of 15 cm is large in most people of normal body habitus. I may have some slides about this also.
22. I am thrilled that you percussed the chest!
23. This is a patient who should have had deep tendon reflexes done, to help determine clinically her euthyroid status.
24. You described the WBC as elevated; but 2.87 is actually abnormally low.
25. Given the normal MCV, I can't call the cause of her anemia chronic iron deficiency.
26. Given the extent of her valvular abnormalities, I would have expected that there would have been at least two
murmurs, one systolic and one diastolic.
27. To me, the most likely cause of the hyponatremia is the furosemide. It would take a lot of fluid overload to make it go
down to 129, and her overall exam does not support that.
1/11/23, 9:48 PM H&P 2
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/4
28. Your Assessment/Plan is written very nicely and reflects careful thought and sound reasoning.
29. Your EBM is right on target and shows good skills with searching and applying the literature.
this is an excellent H&P and reflects wonderful growth from a beginning that was itself quite strong. I am very
pleased with your progress and am eager to see your third H&P.
