
CC: Back pain for one week, epigastric pain for 2 days, N/V for 24 hours
Informant: Patient, who is reliable
HPI:
The patient is a 23 -year-old-male with a significant SH for EtOH consumption and 
noncontributory PMH presenting with new onset back pain for the past week, which progressed 
to include epigastric pain for the past two days, and progressed further to include NBNB emesis 
x4 after meals for the past 24 hours. The patient describes an extensive EtOH history that 
began approximately 3 years ago while in college and included 5-10 shots of whiskey per day 
for a period of 18 months, after which he was admitted to a rehab facility for detox for a period of 
1 month. After another 2 months of abstinence from EtOH, he reports returning to a pattern of 
5-10 shots per day for another 9 months. The last 3 months he reports a significant reduction in 
his EtOH intake and states his last drink of alcohol of any quantity was on 9 May 2021. He was 
in his normal state of health a week ago when he had new onset back pain, followed by 
epigastric pain, and now NBNB emesis for the last 24 hours. These episodes of emesis 
occurred after dinner the previous night and breakfast the morning of presentation. He reports 
still having an appetite. He states the pain is dull and constant, currently a 6/10 and an 8/10 at 
its worst. The pain becomes sharp and is at its worst when he tries to sleep prone on his 
abdomen. The pain prevented him from sleeping the night before admission and he does report 
taking any OTC medications to alleviate his pain. His epigastric pain is well localized but his 
back pain is more diffuse and extends across the width of his back in his lower thoracic and 
upper lumbar spine. His last bowel movement was 36 hours prior to admission and was well 
formed, no changes in color and no blood visible. He has not passed gas in the last 24 hours 
and states he feels very bloated. He does not report any shortness of breath, cough, or pleuritic 
pain but does feel pain in his abdomen with deep inspiration. He reports recent night sweats in 
which he feels intolerant to heat, but does not feel and fever, chills, or significant fatigue.
ROS:
 General: See HPI
 Neuro: Patient states no dizziness / numbness / tingling
 HEENT: Patient states vision changes / no coryza / no sore throat / no change in hearing
 CV: Patient states no chest pain / palpitations
 Lungs: See HPI
 GI: See HPI
 GU: Patient states no changes in urinary habits / no pain or blood on urination 
 Patient states no bruises or easy bleeding
 Derm: Patient states no new rashes or other skin changes
 Psych: Patient states he has a positive mood with little anxiety
PMH:
 Asthma (never hospitalized) from ages 5-10
Medications:
 None
Allergies:
 None
Matt Beier H&P 4 submitted Thursday, July 15, 10:00 PM
PSH:
 None
FH:
 Father age 64 and alive, history of DMT2, HLD, HTN, hypothyroidism
 Mother age 61 and alive, history of DMT2, HLD, HTN
 No known FH of cancer
 Two older sisters, ages 26 and 28, neither with any known health issues
SH:
 Currently employed at a GNC
 Lives at home with parents. Feels safe
 EtOH history as per HPI
 Occasionally chews tobacco. Has never smoked.
 No other drug use
Vitals:
 BP 196/106
 HR 108, regular rhythm
 T 97.9F
 RR 16, normal inspiratory effort without use of accessory muscles
 SpO2 100% on RA
PE:
 General: Patient is in no acute distress, is well nourished, and answers appropriately
 Neuro: A&Ox3, CN II-XII are intact, motor and sensation grossly intact, no obvious FND 
 HEENT: EOMI, PERRLA, sclera anicteric, no conjunctival pallor, no signs or pharyngeal 
erythema, lesions, or ulcers
 Neck: Trachea is midline, no elevation in JVD or hepatojugular reflux, no palpable lymph 
nodes, could not palpate thyroid
 CV: Tachycardic with regular rhythm, normal S1/S2 no murmurs, rubs, or gallops
 Lungs: Normal inspiratory effort. Lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no 
wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. Normal resonance to percussion bilaterally and normal 
tactile fremitus bilaterally in all fields.
 Abdominal: Soft and nondistended. Slightly hypoactive BS. Tender to palpation in the 
epigastric regions. No rigidity. The liver and spleen were not palpable.
 Back: Tenderness on palpation to the lower thoracic and upper lumber spine and 
laterally there is CVA tenderness
 Extremities: Radial and DP and 2+/2+ and symmetric. Equal strength in upper 
extremities on flexion/extension of wrists and forearm. No signs of edema in shins 
bilaterally. Warm and well perfused. 
 Skin: No evidence of rashes, skin breakdown, or ulcers.
Labs and Data:
 CBC: WBC 13.5, Hb 16.5, Plt 449
 BMP: Na 132, Cl 95, K 4.3, Ca 9.5, Mg 1.7, Cr 0.5, BUN 2, HCO3- 24.2
 LFT: AST 169, ALT 77, AlkPhos 185, Tbili 1.2, Dbili 0.4, Alb 3.9
Matt Beier H&P 4 submitted Thursday, July 15, 10:00 PM
 Lipase: 107
 CT Abdomen with IV contrast: Significant for multiple pseudo cyst appearing structures 
throughout the pancreas with largest in the head of the pancreas and measuring 6.4cm. 
There was also significant peri-pancreatic fluid. The gall bladder and biliary structures 
were unremarkable. Evidence of fatty liver. All other visualized structures were within 
normal limits.
Assessment:
 This patient is a 23 yom with an extensive SH of EtOH and noncontributory PMH that 
presents with new onset back and epigastric pain with N/V and NBNB emesis. His PE is 
significant for epigastric and CVA tenderness and he has CT findings suggestive of 
pancreatitis with a mildly elevated lipase, AST, ALT, and AlkPhos.
Plan:
#New onset back pain, epigastric pain, NBNB emesis
 The patient’s presentation of epigastric pain radiating to the back with N/V and 
associated CT findings are strongly suggestive pancreatitis. Given the patient’s reported 
long EtOH history and relative abstinence the last three months, as well as minimal 
sings of acute inflammation such as fat stranding on CT, this appears to be a case of 
chronic pancreatitis with unclear cause for the current precipitation of new onset 
symptoms. Additionally, the lipase is only mildly elevated at 107. While EtOH is the 
most common cause of pancreatitis, gallstones are the second most common and high 
triglycerides and also reasonably common. Given the unremarkable biliary and GB CT 
findings gallstone pancreatitis seems unlikely. The patient’s strong FH of HLD warrants
getting a lipid panel to see if triglycerides play a role in his current presentation. The 
patient should be started on IV lactated ringers for fluid resuscitation. The patient has a 
BISAP score of 1 suggesting relatively low risk of mortality from his current presentation. 
GI should be consulted for possible ERCP pancreatic duct stenting and EUS FNA of the 
pseudo cystic structures. 
#Hepatitis
 The patient’s currently elevated AST and ALT seem most likely to be secondary to 
pancreatitis and of EtOH etiology given AST/ALT ratio > 2
 Viral hepatitis and autoimmune hepatitis panels should be ordered to rule out other 
causes of hepatitis. 
#CVA tenderness
 Given the patient’s back pain extends laterally to his flank and he describes tenderness 
on palpation to the same region, a urinary analysis should be ordered to rule out 
possible urinary tract infection or kidney stone
#N/V
 Zofran should be administered for N/V
#Pain
 IV Tylenol for patient’s current pain