
I think you may have broken a record for early time of submission of an H&P! Thank you for giving me the flexibility to plan
my time. I have reviewed your sixth H&P, which, as I have come to expect, has many strengths. Below are my comments:
1. I commend you for clearly identifying the informant(s) and their reliablity.
2. I commend you for indicating the timing of the chief complaint (as a reasonable substitute for the actual duration).
3. Your construction of the narrative of the HPI is nicely organized and succinctly written without omitting significant
detail. Perhaps the one piece of information that might make it a little more complete is to have indicated the length of time
that the patient has been having these episodes. It was not clear to me whether this has been going on for months or for
years and, if years, when the first episode occurred.
4. Perhaps I'm just a little dense; but it was not clear to me what was meant by "like a 'rubber doll'".
5. The hypertension, TIA, and chronic syncope that you mentioned in the past medical history are legitimately part of the
HPI and there was no need to repeat these in the PMH.
6. The family history would be more complete if you included the ages at which the patient's parents died, and whether
there are children. If there are children, then you would want to include their ages, whether alive or dead, and whether
they have health problems. Sometimes history of an illness in a child can be a clue to an illness in the parent or signal
need for vigilance for emergence of an illness in a parent. There have been instances, for example, when a woman
develops a breast cancer, which made the doctor more vigilant to screen for it in the mother, leading to a diagnosis in the
mother earlier than it might have been made.
7. The ROS is a little sketchy and includes several things that rightly belong in the HPI (fatigue, absence of aura or visual
changes, palpitations or chest pain).
8. I note that the heart rate you recorded is a prime number (73), which tells me that it came from a monitor, unless you
are one of the VERY RARE students who actually feels the pulse for a full minute. (I pick this up every time it happens. ;)
9. I am delighted that you separate rate and rhythm.
10. One thing that is useful to include in describing the pulses is the presence or absence of symmetry when you palpate
them on each side.
11. I commend you for describing respiratory effort!
12. I commend you for percussing the chest. If the findings are normal, all you need to say is "resonant throughout".
13. In the abdomen, you know how I feel about quantifying liver size. Also, the absence of masses is a reasonable thing
to mention.
14. It is more complete to include lymph nodes in addition to those in the neck. I will attach my slide set on the lymph
node exam just in case I have not yet done so.
15. It is curious that you put a potassium of 3.57 in red, as I believe that this is a normal value (which I was taught is 3.5 to
5.0)
16. As usual, your rendition of the Assessment and Plan is excellent. I might want this patient to have ambulatory EEG
and ambulatory cardiac monitoring for a few days, just to try to document the electrophysiologic correlates of her episodes
if these could not be determined while she was in the hospital.
17. This patient (or her husband) should keep a spread sheet at home with her blood pressure readings for a few days to
a couple of weeks, just to make sure that at various times of day her blood pressure is recorded. It is a very good way to
monitor the efficacy of blood pressure treatment. A blood pressure cuff to use at home costs about $30 - $50 and can
prevent huge costs or catastrophic events if it is used.
it is wonderful to see how you have grown as a clinician and to observe your diligent application of constructive
suggestions. You began at a good level and have now achieved a level of excellence that well prepares you to enter the
next phase of your education. It has been a privilege to have been even a small part of your professional advancement.
My chief regret is that I have not had more contact with you, and more direct contact with you, during these six weeks that
seem to have flown by. My sincere wish for you is that you have great satisfaction from your professional activities and
from all other aspects of your life. Thank you for making me so proud of you!
Respectfully,
