
Having carefully read your H&P, I have several comments, many laudatory and several that are intended to help you
improve future efforts. Clearly, this write-up has many strengths, which I will unequivocally point out. But before I begin
my comments I want to ask you again to please prepare your H&Ps as Word documents that you can then attach to an
email. It makes my work a little less difficult that way.
Specific comments:
1. It is conventional (and a very good idea) to indicate clearly, at the beginning, who the informant is, in addition to the
reliability of the informant. You implied the degree of reliability of the informant but didn't explicitly state it. It is very good
that you indicated the assistance of an interpreter. All of this enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of
skepticism in reading the document.
2. It is excellent that you included the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself.
3. The overall chronology of the narrative of the HPI as you wrote it is excellent. But elsewhere in the document you
include information about his alcohol use and its consequences, and, because the HPI is really largely about his alcohol
use and its consequences, this information, that you included in the assessment summary, really is an integral part of the
HPI.
4. It is excellent that you gave a description of the vomitus. It would have been more complete, as a pertinent negative,
to state the absence of recently ingested food in the vomitus.
5. Although it is not essential, it is a good practice to use the moment of admission as the temporal point of reference for
all events in the history. Thus, instead of saying "ago" it would be "prior to admission" (often abbreviated as PTA).
6. In the HPI you made reference to his home medications. It would be more complete, and potentially very important, to
name these meds at this point.
7. In the Family History, it is appropriate to include the age of each person mentioned. Also, children are appropriately
part of the Family History. Some (including me) place into the Family History the presence or absence of certain ailments
that may run in families, including contagious ones (especially tuberculosis). In this patient's instance, as he is from India,
mentioning the presence or absence of tuberculosis in the family history is especially relevant.
8. It is commendable that you gave a quantitative statement about his alcohol intake. (Be aware that most alcoholics
understate the amount that they consume, because of the stigma.)
9. In the vital signs, it is a good practice to describe the rhythm right next to the heart rate, in a general way: "regular"
"irregular (with a description of the irregularity, such as "irregularly irregular" or "with premature beats in a trigeminal
pattern".)
10. Given the details of this specific HPI, it would have been appropriate to do orthostatic heart rate and blood pressure.
11. It is excellent that you noted the tremor. It would be more complete to state what body parts were involved in the
tremor (upper and/or lower extremities, head, tongue, for example).
12. I am impressed that you noted cataracts. This tells me that you looked at his eyes closely! It might have been a little
more defensible simply to describe the color of the pupils, as there are other things besides cataracts that may make a
pupil other than black.
13. Although it seems to be omitted by so many students, I feel strongly that the chest (and abdomen) should be
percussed. It adds minimal time to the exam and can sometimes give you very important information.
14. Please estimate the liver span and say how you tested it (percussion, palpation, or the "scratch test"). I will attach
some slides about this.
15. It would have been relevant especially for this patient to mention the spleen, whether or not it was palpable.
16. It surprised me a little that you didn't mention that the WBC is elevated.
17. In reporting the blood gases it is more complete to include the FiO2 (and if it is on room air, to say that).
18. By the way, I know that the residents use venous blood gases a lot; I personally don't think it is useful. If we really
care about the blood gases, then it makes sense to get an arterial sample.
19. You have the misfortune of having an H&P advisor who does not like the word "transaminitis" because it is not a
standard term that conveys meaningful information. Why not just say "elevated transaminase levels"? It is probably a
generation thing, but you will not find this term in any well-refereed journal or textbook.
20. It would have been more complete to get a HbA1c to help interpret the elevated blood sugar.
21. Although it is not a requirement, to be consistent with the concept of lifelong learning it is a good idea to do a literature
search and find at least one article that is relevant to some aspect of the patient under discussion. There is a separate
check box in EPA for this and it is a good practice to use evidence-based medicine to help guide your learning experience.
22. I would be remiss if I did not praise you for avoiding words like "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in describing the
reporting of symptoms. Please continue this good practice.
2/22/22, 3:37 PM Re: H&P write up 1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/6
this initial H&P has, as I mentioned, many strengths that you can absolutely build on. There are some areas for
improvement (which is still true even for the work that I do after all these decades), and I hope you will take these
suggestions as they are intended--to help you grow. I look forward to your next H&P (as a word document attached to an
email).
