

Once again you have submitted an excellent H&P and again I appreciate that you sent it in early enough in the week (a
Wednesday evening) so that I can plan my own time comfortably. Below are my comments, many of them laudatory and
some with constructive suggestions.
1. I am very pleased that you have clearly identified the informant(s).
2. I am likewise very pleased that you stated clearly the reliability of the informants.
3. And I am pleased that you indicated the duration of the chief complaint.
4. You are to be commended for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" (although there was one mention of
"denied" in your listing of the large amount of stool on the CT near the end of the write-up). But I am glad that you have
adopted avoiding these words over all.
5. Your rendition of the HPI is so good that it is possible to make a diagnosis with confidence from the history alone,
which is the ideal for a medical history. You have given the events quite chronologically and expressed them in clear
language that leaves no room for confusion. This is a very important strength for you to continue to develop.
6. I would like to clarify the difference between "unintentional" and "unexplained" when it comes to weight loss. His
decreased appetite, while not intentional and a symptom of his mourning the loss of a pet, does explain the weight loss.
As a rule, we are most concerned about unexplained weight loss, which may have very ominous implications. I think it is
fair to say that if he could have gotten himself to eat despite his grief he would not have lost the weight. Nonetheless,
given the rest of what is in the HPI, it was very appropriate to include this weight loss and his very credible explanation of
its cause.
7. It may have been good to include less of his past history in the initial introductory statement of the HPI, as this can
sometimes be distracting. You could simply say "with multiple comorbidities" and then enumerate these in the past
medical history, if they are not truly parts of the present illness.
8. I commend you for not repeating things in the Review of Systems. There may be circumstances under which you will
have to include a complete Review of Systems as part of the record, as, for example, if you had a private practice, with the
initial visit of the patient, so that there is an archive of the patient's complete history at least in one relatively retrievable
place.
9. (I have to do this: "ocular" only has one "c".)
10. You are to be commended for defining the abbreviations that you have used, at least the first time you used them.
11. In mentioning the diabetes in the Past Medical History, it would be more complete to include how well it has been
controlled. The first principle of managing a diabetic is to teach the patient how to be a diabetic, and one of the most
fundamental elements of that is for the patient to keep track of how well the diabetes is controlled. If diabetics do not know
their HbA1c, it is likely that their diabetes is not well controlled. Given that this patient has had several complications of his
diabetes (retinopathy, neuropathy, and, perhaps, coronary and peripheral vascular disease) it is likely that his diabetes has
not been well controlled.
12. In the socioeconomic history your include the word "none" several times. Did you mean, simply, to leave this space
blank?
13. It would be more complete to indicate more detail about the marijuana use: quantity and whether it comes from a
supervised source. If obtained "unofficially" it can be contaminated with some undesirable ingredients.
14. Given that his sister had tuberculosis, it would be of use to know where he was born, and, if born outside the United
States, when he immigrated here.
15. I commend you for including the cardiac rhythm with the heart rate in the vital signs.
16. I commend you for including the BMI in the vital signs.
17. In the general appearance it would have been more complete to state whether there was any sign of nutritional
problems, given his loss of about 25% of his prior body weight. Did he have temporal wasting or any non-pigmented
cutaneous striae?
18. I commend you for mentioning the visual field defect. It would be more complete to describe it in a little more detail
(which side, temporal or nasal, approximate degrees up or down from middle of line looking forward. For the latter,
"superior" and "inferior" are commonly used descriptors.
19. This patient should have had a funduscopic examination. It is important to recognize diabetic retinopathy. Here is a
slide from a large set I had put together on external and internal eye exam:
1/26/23, 11:21 AM Re: HP 4
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
This is what a normal fundus looks like:
20. I commend you for percussing the chest.
21. I commend you for measuring the liver span.
22. In mentioning the tenderness of the lower extremities, it would be more complete to indicate the location(s) of the
tenderness.
23. I commend you for mentioning the pigmentary changes in the skin; but it would be more complete to include their
location(s).
24. In the Problem List, you indicate that the diabetes is controlled, but you contradict this later by stating that the HbA1c 5
months earlier was 8.2. I have mentioned above why I feel that the history suggests that the diabetes has not been
particularly well controlled.
25. Your overall Assessment and Plan are very good.
26. You did look up a very relevant article, and you applied it to this patient very well. But, since you mention subsequent
papers that support what this landmark paper reported, it would have been more complete and, perhaps, more scholarly,


https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 3/3
to mention a couple of the more recent papers as references.

you continue to grow at an excellent rate and I am very pleased with the progress that you have made. I look
forward eagerly to H&P 5!
Have a great week-end.

