
I have read your first write-up carefully and am happy to see that it has many strengths. I do have a few constructive
suggestions, in addition to recognizing the write-up's strengths:
1. You are to be commended for commenting on the reliability of the informant.
2. You are to be commended for giving the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the complaint
itself.
3. My approach to the HPI is to make it very chronological. For this reason, it would have been a little better to begin
with the onset of the actual present illness, peptic ulcer disease, even though it began when she was in her teens. You
would state her status of the onset of that illness, the symptoms and procedures that led to the diagnosis, and its
subsequent management, leading, chronologically, to the immediate current problem. That way, you would create a
chronological narrative that would make the diagnosis very evident from the history alone. Believe it or not, 90% of
diagnoses can be made from the history alone if it is done optimally. (This is not to say that the diagnosis is not evident
from the history as you wrote it; it is only to suggest that there may be a more effective way to compose it.
4. For the same reason, instead of putting the PUD in the past history, it would follow to put it into the HPI.
5. I commend you for giving the manifestation of the patient's allergy. This should always be done.
6. In the family history it would be more complete to include the age of anyone included in it.
7. The family history should include, whether well or ill, living or dead, parents, siblings, and children, in addition to other
relatives will illness that may have family implications (as you did with the aunts).
8. I want to commend you for referring to the HPI in the ROS, instead of repeating things there. (I might have put
the constipation into the HPI also, not the ROS, because it is a GI symptom).\
9. I note that you gave the heart rate as 89. That is a prime number, which makes me think it came from a monitor and
not palpation of a pulse or listening to the heart!
10. Ideally, because of this patient's history, she should have had orthostatic heart rate and blood pressure.
11. I commend you for noting the absence of pallor in the eyes. Many people neglect to do that.
12. If you state that the lungs are clear to auscultation, you imply that adventitious sounds are absent, and so there is no
need to say that there are no wheezes, rhonchi, or rales.
13. In describing the heart sounds, which you give under "chest", be aware that the rate is only rapid, normal, or slow.
"Regular" only applies to the rhythm.
14. It would have been more complete to percuss the chest. It only takes at most 10 seconds.
15. Your mention of the birthmark is admirable; but it would be even more so if you had described it in more detail,
including color and dimensions.
16. This is a patient for whom it would be really good to include the MCV with the blood count data. This might tell you
whether she has been losing blood chronically.
17. In describing the findings on EGD, it would be more complete to state where the ulcer was seen--greater or lesser
curvature, fundus, pylorus...
18. This is a little nit-picking, but the diagnosis for the abdominal pain is not the GI bleed but, rather, the ulcer itself.
19. It would have been good to give a reference for the Rockall score. I will send you some in a separate email.
20. Good that you included a refereed article for EBM and applied it to this patient.
this is a very, very good write-up which mainly needing a little polish. Most of my suggestions do not address
substance, which is really very good as you constructed your write-up. I am certain that you will grow excellently from
this starting point, which is already very good.
I will phone you between 2:00 and 2:30 today.
