
* History provided by patient herself who is a reliable historian.
CC: shortness of breath
HPI: the patient is a 76 y.o. female with PMHx of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis diagnosed two 
years ago and on 2L oxygen at home. Since being diagnosed the patient has been managing her 
symptoms with her home medications, however earlier this year in January she was admitted to 
the hospital for acute hypoxic respiratory failure secondary to a pulmonary interstitial fibrosis 
exacerbation. At the time she was treat with IV steroids and inhalers with improvement in her 
respiratory status. She was eventually titrated down to PO prednisone. Patient also completed a 
course of antibiotics. She had been doing well until 3 days prior to admission when she began 
feeling short of breath, particularly when walking. She reports needing to sit down in a chair for 
some time before she is able to catch her breath completely. She reports using her inhaler more 
frequently without relief. She reports dry cough, with associated chest pressure when she has had 
“coughing fits.” No wheezing. The patient has not had chest pain at rest, palpitations, 
diaphoresis, leg swelling, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever or chills, 
lightheadedness, or dizziness.
The patient has an outpatient pulmonologist but reports that she has not seen them recently.
PAST MEDICAL HISTORY:
Interstitial lung disease on 2L nasal cannula at baseline
PAST SURGICAL HISTORY
Appendectomy (in her 20s)
Left knee replacement (in her 60s)
SOCIAL HISTORY:
Patient has never smoked cigarettes. She drinks alcohol occasionally. No other drug use such as 
marijuana, cocaine, or heroin. Patient is a retired secretary. Patient is married – husband at 
bedside.
FAMILY HISTORY:
Mother: no known medical conditions; passed in her 80s
Father: HTN and CAD; passed in his late 70s.
Sister: HTN; alive, 73 years old
Patient has two sons who are healthy. Ages 48 and 50.
MEDICATIONS:
- Robitussin-DM 10-100 mg/5 mL liquid PRN
- Breo Elipta 200-25 mcg/dose inhaler daily
- Duo-Neb 0.5-2.5 mg/3 mL nebulizer solution, q6 PRN for wheezing or shortness of 
breath
- montelukast 10 mg tablet, daily
- theophylline 100mg bid
ALLERGIES:
Benzonatate (reaction: cough)


ROS:
CONSTITUTIONAL: No weight loss. See HPI.
HEENT: No changes in vision and hearing.
RESPIRATORY: See HPI.
CV: See HPI.
GI: See HPI.
GU: No dysuria and urinary frequency.
MSK: No myalgia and joint pain.
SKIN: No rash and pruritus.
NEUROLOGICAL: No headache and syncope.
PSYCHIATRIC: No recent changes in mood. No anxiety and depression.
VITALS: 
Last 24 hours (Low-High, Last) -
Temp: [36.3 °C (97.4 °F)-37 °C (98.6 °F)] 36.6 °C (97.8 °F)
Heart Rate: [64-108] 92
Resp: [16-28] 18
BP: (98-146)/(58-86) 146/76
SpO2: [94 %-100 %] 100 %
O2 Delivery Method: Nasal cannula
O2 Flow Rate (L/min): [4 L/min-5 L/min] 5 L/min
Height - 1.549 m (5' 1")
Weight - 45.4 kg (100 lb)
Body mass index is 18.89 kg/m².
PHYSICAL EXAM:
GENERAL: Alert and oriented x 3. No acute distress. Frail, thin appearing. Comfortable 
appearing.
EYES: EOMI. Anicteric.
HENT: Moist mucous membranes. No scleral icterus. No cervical lymphadenopathy.
LUNGS: Swallow breathing. Clear to auscultation bilaterally of upper and middle lobes. Dry 
crackles noted at the bases bilaterally. No rhonchi or wheezing. No accessory muscle use. Breath 
sounds equal bilaterally. (Unfortunately, I missed the opportunity to percuss the chest on this 
patient)
CARDIOVASCULAR: Regular rate and rhythm. No murmur. No JVD.
ABDOMEN: Soft, non-tender and non-distended. No palpable masses.
EXTREMITIES: No edema. Non-tender.
SKIN: 1-2cm scattered petechiae on lower abdomen. Skin is thin.
NEUROLOGIC: No focal neurological deficits. CN II-XII grossly intact, but not individually 
tested.
PSYCHIATRIC: Cooperative. Appropriate mood and affect.
LABS:
Na+ 138 Procalcitonin 0.83
K+ 4.5 Troponin 12
Cl- 100 ProBNP 1065 (normal for patient >75 yr)
CO2 33
WBC 13.21
Plt 326
D-dimer 258
Lactate 1.2
Mg+ 2.0


IMAGING, EKG, AND OTHER STUDIES:
CTA chest with contrast - Extensive traction bronchiectasis involving upper, mid and lower 
lobes bilaterally with changes of pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. No interval change from 
previous imaging. No pneumothorax. No pleural fluid.
CXR - There is no significant interval change in diffuse extensive interstitial opacities and 
honeycombing. There are no focal consolidations. There are no definite pleural effusions or 
evidence of pneumothorax.
ASSESSMENT AND PLAN:
76 y.o. female with a history of interstitial pulmonary fibrosis on 2L of oxygen at home who 
presented to the ED 2 days ago for worsening shortness of breath. CTA chest and CXR 
consistent with interstitial pulmonary fibrosis without evidence of disease progression acute 
pathologies – non consolidation, pleural effusions, or pneumothorax. Patient satting well on 4-5L 
in the hospital. She received steroids in the ED.
#acute on chronic hypoxic respiratory failure
#pulmonary interstitial fibrosis exacerbation
- acute hypoxic respiratory failure with need for increased O2 most likely secondary to known 
pulmonary interstitial fibrosis
- CTA with extensive bronchiectasis changes consistent with pulmonary interstitial 
fibrosis; unchanged from previous
- CXR w/ diffuse extensive interstitial opacities and honeycombing
- etiology of the exacerbation is unclear at this time. Patient does not believe that she has been 
exposed to any environmental triggers such as smoke
- less likely exacerbated by bacterial or viral pneumonia – CXR negative for consolidation; 
procalcitonin normal (less likely bacterial); viral panel including adenovirus, coronavirus 
(HKU1, NL63, 229E, OC43), metapneumonvirus, parainfluenza 1, 2, 3, 4, Bordetella pertussis 
PCR, SARS-CoV-2, rhinovirus/enterovirus, influenza A & B PCR, RSV PCR, mycoplasma 
pneumonia, and Chlamydophila pneumoniae all negative
- PE less likely – D-dimer normal; CTA negative for PE
- CXR without pneumothorax
- on PE dry crackles lower lobes bilaterally, finding consistent with interstitial pulmonary 
fibrosis
- need to monitor R heart function in the setting of long-standing pulmonary fibrosis and acute 
exacerbation; TTE from 1/30/23 demonstrated normal RV size, but difficult to assess ventricular 
function due to poor image quality. Monitor patients for signs of R HR ie JVD, LE edema and 
consider TTE repeat if signs occur
- patient received IV Solu-Medrol 125 mg in the ED with symptomatic improvement
- pulmonology consulted, recommending O2 supplementation as needed with target saturation 
>92%. Bronchodilators. Incentive spirometry. Aspiration/apnea precautions
- theophylline 300 mg; Singulair 10 mg, DuoNeb 24 hr; budesonide TID; Status post IV SoluMedrol 125 mg
- on 2-3L at baseline; satting at 100% here on 4-5L NC. Will continue to monitor oxygen 
saturations and reduce O2 when symptoms have improved
- Patient counseled on importance of avoiding environmental triggers such as smoke including 
campfire smoke, forest fire smoke, and secondhand smoke from tobacco products.


Patient now with recurrent episodes of exacerbations pulmonary interstitial fibrosis; patient has 
previous had hypersensitivity and autoimmune workups completed for interstitial pulmonary 
fibrosis including ESR, CRP, ANA, ANCA, RF, CCP, and hypersensitivity pneumonitis
serology, and which have all been normal making hypersensitivity pneumonitis and connective 
tissues diseases such as systemic sclerosis, polymyositis-dermatomyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
SLE, mixed connective tissue disease, and vasculitis (granulomatosis with polyangiitis and 
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis) less likely. She also has no history of use of 
chemotherapeutic agents such as bleomycin, busulfan, methotrexate; no use of amiodarone, 
nitrofurantoin, phenytoin, penicillamine, or cocaine, or heroin. No history of TB. Patient should 
follow up outpatient with pulmonology for further assessment, but it is likely that her interstitial 
pulmonary fibrosis is idiopathic in etiology and an agent such as pirfenidone or nintedanib may 
be beneficial to start.
#leukcytosis
WBC 13.21 – mildly elevated
Infectious vs reactive
Patient afebrile and without dysuria, cough, chest pain, or other symptoms suggesting possible 
infection, less likely infectious
- will monitor CBC and temperature, and symptoms/signs of pneumonia (ie consolidation, 
cough, chest pain, fever, chills, crackles, worsening dyspnea) as patient is high aspiration risk
Clinical question: What types of therapeutics can we provide for patients with idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis?
Pirfenidone, an inhibitor of TGF-B stimulated collagen synthesis….
I will send an EBM tomorrow – stay tuned!