
 
"This is a practice note that will be filtered from the legal medical record. Practice notes 
may not be attested or used for billing purposes. At the discretion of the 
attending/supervising provider, medical students may be allowed to write a H&P and/or 
progress note. With the proper attestation, these notes may be used for billable 
purposes. Please speak with your supervising/attending regarding whether you should 
be using a practice note or a H&P/progress note at this time." 
 
History and Physical 
Chief Complaint: 
L eye blurry vision, abdominal pain, diarrhea
History of Present Illness: 
This is a 47 year-old male who was diagnosed with T2DM at age 25, and was 
started on insulin. He continued his medications until a year ago, when he decided to 
discontinue insulin since his glucose levels have been stable when monitored at home. 
One week prior to admission, he noticed sharp, stabbing epigastric abdominal pain 
which he rated as 7/10 on the pain scale. He describes the pain would come and go. In 
addition, he noted 1-2 daily episodes of watery, non-bloody, brown/yellow diarrhea for 
one week. He also describes decreased oral intake of solids and liquids during this time 
period. A few hours prior to admission, he woke up in the morning with left frontal 
headache and blurry vision in his left eye. He notes feeling like there is a curtain over his 
eye where he can only see silhouettes and outlines in the left visual field. He describes 
slightly better vision in his left peripheral field. He does not complain of any changes in 
vision of his right eye in all visual fields. He does not experience any pain with eye 
movements.
After admission, he describes his abdominal pain and headache are now resolved. 
He describes he has been urinating normally. He did not experience any fever, chills, 
nausea, vomiting, chest pain, palpitations, cough, shortness of breath, and dysuria. He 
has not undergone any recent surgeries and has not traveled recently. He has not been 
exposed to any sick individuals and did not try any new food recently. 
Review of Systems:
Constitutional: Negative for chills and fever. Decreased PO intake. 
HENT: Negative for ear pain, hearing loss, rhinorrhea, sneezing, sore throat, trouble 
swallowing and voice change. 
Eyes: Negative for pain and redness. L eye blurry vision (slightly better on L peripheral 
visual field). Negative for vision changes in his R eye.
Respiratory: Negative for cough, chest tightness and shortness of breath.
Cardiovascular: Negative for chest pain and palpitations. 
Gastrointestinal: Negative for abdominal distention, blood in stool, nausea and vomiting. 
Abdominal pain: Epigastric, stabbing, sharp (now resolved). Diarrhea: Watery, 
brown/yellow, non-bloody.


Genitourinary: Negative for decreased urine volume, difficulty urinating, dysuria and 
urgency. 
Musculoskeletal: Negative for neck pain. 
Allergic/Immunologic: Negative. 
Neurological: Negative for speech difficulty. Headaches: L frontal headache (now 
resolved)
Psychiatric/Behavioral: Negative. 
Past Medical History: 
Diabetes mellitus (diagnosed at age 25). Patient is currently not on any medications.
Past Surgical History: 
Patient has not undergone any surgeries.
Home Medications:
Patient is not on any home medications.
Allergies: 
No Known Allergies
Social History: 
Patient has never smoked cigarettes before. Patient describes occasionally consuming 
alcohol (1-2 times a month). His most recent alcohol intake was last Friday (5 days prior 
to admission), when he drank about 6oz of whiskey. Patient has never used drugs before. 
He is currently unemployed. He describes living at home with a friend. 
Family History: 
Patient describes having one older sister with high blood sugar levels. Otherwise, the rest 
of his family members are in good health. 
Exam: 
Vitals:
01/04/23 0710 01/04/23 1121
BP: (!) 201/101 (!) 181/99
BP Location: Right arm
Patient 
Position:
Sitting
Pulse: 87 83
Resp: 16 18
Temp: 36.7 °C (98.1 °F)
TempSrc: Temporal
SpO2: 99% 96%
Weight: 75 kg (165 lb 5.5 oz)
Height: 1.6 m (5' 3")


Physical Exam
Constitutional: 
 General: He is not in acute distress.
 Appearance: He is not ill-appearing. He appears well-nourished.
HENT: 
 Head: Atraumatic. No pain upon palpation. 
 Nose: No congestion or rhinorrhea. 
 Mouth: Mucous membranes are moist. 
 Pharynx: Oropharynx is clear. 
 No jaw pain. 
Eyes: 
 General: Visual field deficit (L visual field deficit, slightly better on the L peripheral 
visual field, normal R visual fields) present. No scleral icterus.
 Extraocular Movements: Extraocular movements intact. 
 Conjunctiva/sclera: Conjunctivae normal. 
 Pupils: Pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light. 
Cardiovascular: 
 Rate and Rhythm: Normal rate and regular rhythm. 
 Pulses: Normal pulses. 
 No murmurs, rubs, or gallops.
Pulmonary: 
 Effort: Pulmonary effort is normal. No respiratory distress. 
 Normal resonance to percussion.
 Breath sounds: Normal breath sounds. No wheezing, rhonchi or rales. 
Abdominal: 
 General: Abdomen is flat. Bowel sounds are normal. There is no distension. 
 Palpations: Abdomen is soft. 
 Tenderness: There is no abdominal tenderness. There is no right CVA tenderness or left 
CVA tenderness. 
Musculoskeletal: 
 Cervical back: Normal range of motion. 
 Right lower leg: Edema (2+) present. 
 Left lower leg: Edema (2+) present. 
Skin:
 General: Skin is dry. 
Neurological: 
 Mental Status: He is alert and oriented to person, place, and time. 
 Cranial Nerves: No facial asymmetry. No CN deficits other than the CN2 testing of the L 
eye.
 Sensory: Sensation is intact. 
 Motor: Motor function is intact. 
Labs: 


 
Recent Labs
Lab Units 01/04/23
0820
WBC AUTO 10*3/uL 6.13
HEMATOCRIT % 35.1*
HEMOGLOBIN g/dL 11.2*
PLATELETS 
AUTO
10*3/uL 232
MCV fL 84.2
RDW-CV % 13.6
Recent Labs
Lab Units 01/04/23
1055
01/04/23
0820
SODIUM mmol/L 141 139
CHLORIDE mmol/L 111* 108
POTASSIUM mmol/L 5.90* 6.10*
CO2 mmol/L 20.3* 18.5*
BUN mg/dL 29* 32*
CREATININE mg/dL 3.0* 3.9*
CALCIUM mg/dL 8.8 9.6
ANION GAP mmol/L 10 13
Recent Labs
Lab Units 01/04/23
0820
ALT U/L 18
AST U/L 23
ALK PHOS U/L 74
ALBUMIN g/dL 3.6
Imaging: 
No image results found.
Problem List: 
Diagnosis Date Noted
• AKI (acute kidney injury) (CMS/HCC) 01/04/2023
• Vision loss of left eye 01/04/2023
• Hypertensive urgency 01/04/2023


Assessment/Plan: 
XXXXX XXXXX is a 47 year-old male with PMH of T2DM who presents with 1 week of 
epigastric, sharp abdominal pain and watery, non-bloody diarrhea, in addition to acute 
onset of L frontal headache and L eye blurry vision this morning. His BUN levels and 
elevated creatinine, in addition to physical exam findings of bilateral pitting edema, are 
suggestive of AKI on undiagnosed CKD. His monocular vision loss associated with 
headache can be due to retinal diseases (eg, central retinal artery occlusion, retinal 
detachment) or optic disc abnormalities (eg, giant cell arteritis, inflammatory conditions).
There is also concern for hypertensive urgency given that his BP ranged from 181/99-
201/101. 
# AKI on undiagnosed CKD
Since the patient reported decreased PO intake and a week of daily episodes of diarrhea, 
pre-renal acute kidney injury is most likely. Given his history of diabetes and elevated 
creatinine level at 3.9mg/dL upon admission, there could be underlying undiagnosed 
chronic kidney disease. 
[ ] give 1L IV fluids
[ ] Renal and urinary bladder ultrasound to rule out obstructive causes of AKI
[ ] Urinalysis and urine lytes to have diagnostic insight (eg, looking for RBCs, proteinuria)
#Left eye blurry vision
Patient describes sudden onset of left eye vision blurriness that is not resolving, which he 
noted as “curtain over his eye.” He also describes associated L frontal headache that is 
now resolved. He does not experience any periorbital pain or pain with extraocular 
movements. Although a clear etiology is not available at this time, some differentials are 
central retinal artery occlusion given his history of diabetes and sudden onset, giant cell 
arteritis, central retinal vein occlusion, and retinal detachment. Giant cell arteritis is less 
likely given the lack of temporal headache, jaw pain, fever, and scalp tenderness. 
[ ] Consult optho for comprehensive eye examination (funduscopic examination)
[ ] Carotid doppler to rule out carotid atherosclerosis (common cause of central retinal 
artery occlusion)
[ ] ESR, CRP to rule out inflammatory causes of optic disc abnormalities (eg, giant cell 
arteritis
#Hypertensive Urgency
Patient had blood pressure ranging from 181/99-201/101. Although he presented with 
headache and monocular vision loss, it is challenging to assess if there is evidence of end 
organ dysfunction. The goal to control his blood pressure will involve lowering his BP by 
25%. 
[ ] Administer 1 dose of 10mg hydralazine and reassess blood pressure
#Hyperkalemia


Labs showed his K was at 6.1, but patient does not have any cardiac symptoms of 
hyperkalemia like heart palpitations/arrhythmias on EKG nor any signs of muscle 
weakness. 
[ ] Administer IV calcium gluconate
[ ] Start Lokelma (sodium zirconium cyclosilicate) 
#Abdominal pain, non-bloody diarrhea
Patient’s GI symptoms (abdominal pain, diarrhea) are most likely due to self-limited viral 
gastroenteritis. Since he does not have other concerning symptoms such as fever, anuria, 
dizziness, hematochezia, and vomiting, we can continue to monitor his GI symptoms
without additional interventions. His abdominal pain is also now resolved. 
#Uncontrolled diabetes
Although the patient was on insulin until a year ago, he presented to the ED without 
being on any glucose-controlling medications and elevated glucose levels of 166.
[ ] Measure HbA1c
[ ] Start Insulin sliding scale
Literature Search
What is the best algorithmic approach to evaluating acute kidney injury?
- Start with prerenal causes of AKI to determine if there is decreased kidney 
perfusion due to fluid depletion, heart insufficiency, or renal vasoconstriction. If 
prerenal causes are ruled out, postrenal causes such as obstruction should be 
ruled out by using an ultrasound. If postrenal cause is also ruled out, we can 
explore intrarenal causes of AKI such as acute interstitial nephritis, 
glomerulonephritis, and other nonspecific causes (eg, ischemia, toxins, sepsis). 
Kellum JA, Lameire N; KDIGO AKI Guideline Work Group. Diagnosis, evaluation, and 
management of acute kidney injury: a KDIGO summary (Part 1). Crit Care. 
2013;17(1):204. Published 2013 Feb 4. doi:10.1186/cc11454
Makris K, Spanou L. Acute Kidney Injury: Diagnostic Approaches and Controversies. Clin 
Biochem Rev. 2016;37(4):153-175.
How can screening for albuminuria be useful for patients with T2DM?
- Increased urinary protein excretion is an early manifestation in diabetic 
nephropathy, so using a specific assay for albumin can be clinically significant for 
having insight into developing nephropathy in diabetic patients. 
Satchell SC, Tooke JE. What is the mechanism of microalbuminuria in diabetes: a role for 
the glomerular endothelium?. Diabetologia. 2008;51(5):714-725. doi:10.1007/s00125-
008-0961-8