
Story obtained by Patient and Girlfriend and appear to be good historians
CC: progressive painless lymphadenopathy, fatigue, productive cough, and non-intentional weight 
loss over the past 3 months
22 y/o male was sent here by oncologist Dr. Dr. Beaula Koduri at their initial visit for evaluation of 
progressive painless lymphadenopathy, fatigue, productive cough, night sweats, and nonintentional weight loss over the past 3 months PTA. Reports feeling a painless lymph node in his 
lower L neck one year ago but had no other symptoms. He then felt another two in his left upper 
neck 6-8 months PTA but still did not have any symptoms or seek evaluation. Over the past 2-3 
months PTA he noticed progressive fatigue, productive cough with clear sputum, increases in 
lymph node size (no estimation) and weight loss noticed by needing to decrease belt size and 
changing waist size from 31 to 30/29. Last month he noticed a lymph node in his L axilla. Over the 
past two weeks, he has had night sweats causing his sheets to be wet in the morning, decrease 
exercise tolerance causing increased time to catch his breath after walking up one flight of stairs, a 
pruritic erythematous rash on R shoulder/L forearm/BL from knees to ankles when taking hot 
showers and resolve shortly after leaving the shower, and a pruritic erythematous rash bilaterally 
in the axilla that is constant. He tried changing Deodorant but the rash under his arm did not 
resolve. Over the last week, he reports increased dysphagia to solids. He has not had any 
regurgitation when eating or pain but feels it takes longer for food to get down his throat. No 
dysphagia to liquids. Also notes intermittent palpitations at rest over the past 2 months but no 
chest pain, lightheadedness dizziness, or nausea during the episodes.
Last week, patient was seen here with these complaints and culture reveled chlamydial infection 
when he and his partner took 7 days of doxycycline/cefdinir in completion for. He went to JFK 3/1 
with these symptoms also and CT C/A/P revealed L parotid, supraclavicular, subpectoral, Para 
celiac, portal caval, retroperitoneal, and costophrenic lymph nodes with multiple hypoechoic 
masses in the liver concerning for lymphoma or metastatic disease which prompted visit with 
oncologist who sent him here.
No recent infections other than chlamydia, recent travel, sick contacts, bug bites, exposure to 
significant radiation or family history of lymphomas. Patient was seen at different urgent cares for 
yearly physicals until 19y/o and has not been to a physician since.
ROS:
Per HPI, +chills, -headaches, fevers, vision changes, hearing changes, SOB, dyspnea, chest pain, 
N/V/D, constipation, urinary symptoms, joint swelling, edema, bone pain, or weakness.
PMHx:
-Was apparently in good health prior to symptoms outlined above
-Childhood vaccines UTD
-2 doses of Pfizer vaccine last year
PSurghx:
None
Gardner Ryan H&P 4 submitted Thu 3/9/22 ~8:15 pm
Meds:
None
Allergies:
None
Family History:
-Unknown Mother and father (50s-60s?) complete family history, does not believe they have a 
history of cancer or any other chronic diseases
-7 siblings all healthy to his knowledge
-Grandfather was a smoker and had lung cancer at a late age >80
Social:
-Moved out of parents house in nj 1-2 years PTA to live with his aunt and uncle in north brunswick 
where he feels safe and has a support system. Reports he just wanted to move out of the house, 
there was no precipitating event that he noted. He is in a relationship with a long term girlfriend 
and he has been monogamous. He works at a factory that makes wooden doors and does not have 
any memory of chemical exposure. Played football in high school. Drinks 4 beers a night if there is 
a social occasion on the weekend. Uses 1 disposal vaporizable nicotine device every 1.5 weeks x 2 
years. Smokes marijuana rarely. No other illicit drug use. He was never tested for HIV.
Objective:
VITALS
T: 98.1 Tmax: 98.1 @ 08 Mar 18:07
HR: 62 (62 - 76) regular rhythm 
BP: 127/60 (127/60 - 123/88)
RR: 16 (16 - 18) | SpO2: 99% (99% - 99%) on RA unlabored breaths 
PE:
General: Age appropriate male in NAD
HEENT: 2-3cm compressible, mobile lymph nodes noted in the L parotid, Posterior Cervical, and 
supraclavicular regions. EOMI. No tracheal deviation. No mucosal or conjunctival pallor. No lesions 
or lymphadenopathy in oropharynx. No nuchal rigidity
Chest: Regular rate, no MGR, resonate to percussion
Lungs: Clear to auscultation bl, normal chest excursion, resonate to percussion
Abdominal: Liver approx 12cm, no splenomegaly appreciated, normal bowel sounds, tympanic to 
percussion, no tenderness to palpation
Extremities: No inguinal nodes palpated, no edema, FROM, no joint swelling, warm and pulses 2+
Skin: 3x4 cm non-raised, continuous erythematous rashes in the anterior/superior quadrant of the 
armpit without scaling or ulceration. 1x2cm raised erythematous lesion on left upper arm without 
pain on palpation, ulceration, or scaling.
Neuro: CN2-12 intact, 5/5 strength in all major muscle groups, A&Ox3
Psych: responding to questions appropriately
Gardner Ryan H&P 4 submitted Thu 3/9/22 ~8:15 pm
Labs:
LABS (last 24h)
139 | 101 | 12
--------------------< 87 Ca: 9.0 [03/08 @ 13:33]
4.1 | 26.6 | 1.0
WBC: 15.0 / Hb: 12.4 / Hct: 38.7 / Plt: 243 [03/08 @ 13:33]
-- Diff: N:86.20% L:7.0% Mo:5.3% Eo:0.0% Baso:0.8%
MCV 87
Imaging:
03/08/2022 16:37 CT Neck Soft Tissue W/Contrast- Extensive left-sided cervical lymphadenopathy 
with multiple left parotid masses which likely represent pathologically enlarged lymph nodes as 
well. There is left axillary lymphadenopathy which is only partly imaged. Differential 
considerations include lymphoma.
Assessment and Plan:
22 y/o male with no significant past medical history was sent here by oncologist Dr. Dr. Beaula 
Koduri at their initial visit for evaluation for progressive painless lymphadenopathy, fatigue, 
productive cough, dysphagia, night sweats, and non-intentional weight loss over the past 2-3 
months Since first lymph node appeared, fairly rapid increased in size and quantity with 
progressive symptoms. Imaging here and as OP with neutrophil predominant lymphocytosis and 
anemia concerning for malignancy vs infectious vs autoimmune. Will need to consult surgery for 
excisional biopsy to evaluate lymph nodes.
#Progressive Lymphadenopathy/Lymphocytosis
- Differential is broad with lymphadenopathy and constitutional symptoms but significant concern 
for lymphoma vs metastatic disease vs less likely infectious vs inflammatory with evidence of METs 
to liver. No sign of CNS involvement.
-Excisional Biopsy
-Manual CBC with diff
- For infectious work-up we will follow-up CMV PCR, EBV IgM, HIV, hepatitis panel, T spot and 
blood cultures -LFTs due to possible mets to liver
-If lymph node biopsy does not reveal a definitive diagnosis, will consider broader work-up 
including Lyme, Babesia, or Ehrlichia/Anaplasma, and possible rheumatologic etiologies.
-Rash with shower concerning for polycythemia vera possibly but labs and presentation not 
consistent
-Phosphorous and Uric acid r/o tumor lysis
-ESR, CRP
#Dysphagia
-New this week
-Swallowing study
#Anemia
-HGB 13 on 3/1
-12.3 today, normocytic, no signs of bleeding
-Will trend, iron studies not needed at this time