
First, again I want to acknowledge your promptness in sending me the H&P early enough to enable me to plan my own
time efficiently. It is very helpful and I appreciate that.
Second, after review of your third H&P, I conclude that you are continuing to make enormous strides as you develop into
an outstanding clinician. I have many laudatory comments and a few suggestions for continued growth and improvement.
They follow:
1. I commend you strongly for indicating the various informants for this history.
2. I also commend you strongly for your indication of the reliability of the informants and the reasons for the less-thanideal reliability. It is very important for the reader to be able to interpret the information in the appropriate context.
3. It is excellent that you have included the duration of the chief complaint. (It is possible that :"alcohol withdrawal" is
more the diagnosis than part of the chief complaint, but if the patient actually told you that he feels he is suffering from not
drinking recently, then, indeed, withdrawal is an integral part of the chief complaint.)
4. Your summary statement of the co-morbidities in the introductory lines is excellently composed, succinct and clear.
5. In the third line of the HPI, it might be a little more fluent to insert "since" before "3 days ago" and some (including me)
would say "prior to admission" instead of "ago".
6. Before I go any further, I want to make sure that I commend you for your conscientious avoidance of "admit" "claim"
"deny" and "endorse" in your write-ups. To me this is a big deal.
7. Over the years I have learned that beer cans come in different sizes. It would be of value to indicate the size of the
beer cans (in ounces) if possible. There are "40 clubs" where people compete over how many 40-ounce cans of beer they
can consume in one sitting. I believe that most cans of beer are 12 ounces, but I am not sure.
8. It is very good that you did not repeat the entire Review of Systems and used "otherwise negative' to report what you
found. There may be times, in order to justify a certain fee level, that you may have to record every item in the Review of
Systems, but in this setting I do not believe it is necessary.
9. In the Past Medical History, it may have been of value to give a few details about the diabetes and whether it is
adequately controlled and how it is managed. This is especially true when there are neurologic symptoms. If he has no
idea how well his diabetes is controlled, that may be very important. The first principle of the treatment of diabetes is to
teach the patient how to be a diabetic. Many endocrine practices have a diabetes educator on their staff, and this service
is reimbursable by insurers. (You do mention the blood glucose, but not with the initial labs.)
10. In the social history, it is useful to state whether his unemployed status is a consequence of his alcohol use, and
whether he has ever been arrested as a consequence of alcohol-related behaviors.
11. I commend you for quantifying the tobacco use in the way that you did.
12. His history of evictions due to alcohol use can be included in the History of Present Illness.
13. It would be more complete to include the ages of his parents, including the age of death of the father if known.
14. In the vitals, I am pleased that you included the rhythm with the heart rate.
15. A respiratory rate of 18 is rapid. For this reason it would be more complete to state whether the breaths are labored or
shallow.
16. I commend you for including the BMI with the other data.
17. I commend you for noting the scleral icterus. (I did not see a bilirubin listed with the labs. It would be more complete
to have included this.)
18. I commend you for giving a quantitative measure of the liver size. As for the spleen, if it is not palpable that is
enough. (If it is palpable, it is at least three times the normal size.)
19. It is excellent that you noted the tremor. It would be more complete to state whether it is an intention tremor or a
resting tremor. Also, a more complete cerebellar exam would be appropriate especially in this setting.
20. All patients should have deep tendon reflexes recorded, but especially in this setting of impending delirium tremens.
21. Kudos to you for including the MCV and RDW.
22. To me, it is not possible to make the diagnosis of alcoholic hallucinosis without a concomitant blood alcohol level.
From the history, this is clearly all alcohol withdrawal. Hallucinations are an integral part of this syndrome, as are the
tremors and agitation.
23. Please try not to use so many abbreviations in the write-ups. The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations (JCAHO) is very strict about this, requiring organizations that it accredits to have a list or permitted
abbreviations. When records contain other that the abbreviations on this list, it may adversely affect accreditation status,
which is very undesirable for the organization. The overuse of abbreviations is a trend that I am seeing more and more in
our younger doctors, and it is of great concern to me.
24. In your list of diagnoses, you do mention a bilirubin of 1.9. At that level, it is extremely difficult to see jaundice, even in
the sclerae. I am surprised and impressed that you were able to see scleral icterus at this level of bilirubin.
1/19/23, 10:59 AM Re: HP 3
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
25. It is probable that the low platelet count is a result of hypersplenism related to cirrhosis and increase portal vein
pressure.
26. Your EBM is very relevant and useful. But I am curious: Was there not something more recent than 2012 regarding
this subject?
27. One of the most important parts of the management of patients such as this is, in my opinion, involvement of a social
worker as soon as possible. This patient is a prime example of the extreme importance of the social determinants of
disease. If his is to have any chance at recovery, the types of services that social workers know of better than physicians
do are paramount in his management. It has been my observation that social work consultants are greatly under-utilized in
this hospital.
yet again you have provided an excellent H&P and each one shows improvement over the ones before, which
have themselves been really good. I am eager to see H&P number 4!
Have a great weekend.
