
As promised, I have reviewed your written H&P and have several comments. Overall it has many strengths, and I will
point those out to reinforce them; but I do have several suggestions to make subsequent HandP's stronger for the future.
1. I commend you for indicating the informant and the informant's reliability. This enables us to apply the appropriate
degree of skepticism as we read the narrative.
2. I commend you for indicating the duration of the chief complaint right up front with the chief complaint itself; although
in the narrative you seem to contradict the duration of the chief complaint that you state at the beginning of the document
(24 hours vs 10 hours).
3. I do want to commend you for avoiding the use of "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in the narrative. Many of your
peers have not yet assimilated this into their writing.
4. It would have been more complete to indicate the dose of Tylenol and of Aleve that the patient took. This would help
to understand her lack of response to these meds.
5. There are some areas that would have benefited from some proofreading. For example, you use the word "iterum"
when I think you may have meant "interim". (Actually, "interim" in that context doesn't work. You probably really meant
"intervening"...or you could have said "...in the 2 months since...
6. In the Past Medical History, it would have been helpful to state how she lost 100 pounds.
7. It is best to use the moment of admission as the point of reference for all events in the narrative, instead of "yesterday"
or "ago". Better to say "...the day prior to admission..." because that eliminates any confusion regarding the chronology of
the narrative no matter when it is read.
8. But I do commend you for constructing a narrative that is very chronologically arranged. That makes it much easier,
most of the time, to arrive at a correct diagnosis.
9. The family history of renal disease is striking. I commend you for including siblings and children in it. (I will come back
to the family history of renal disease in comments below.)
10. In the Vitals, when you give the heart rate, it is very helpful to describe the rhythm, at least in observational terms
(e.g., "regular", "irregularly irregular" "irregular in a trigeminal pattern...")
11. In describing liver size, it is ideal to be as quantitative as possible. You can palpate, percuss, or scratch out the liver
size (slides attached).
12. I commend you for indicating, in a semiquantitative way, the extent of the peripheral edema.
13. In anemic patients it is helpful to include the MCV and RDW with the data from the CBC.
14. In your discussion of the differential of RUQ ...?... I think you left out some words, especially at the end of the last
sentence."...as likely origin of..."
15. Your overall discussion in the Assessment/Plan is very thoughtful and interesting.. But I did not see, anywhere in the
document, any comments about the fact that there is a strong family tendency to renal disease. It appears to affect, or is
expected to affect, three generations. Is there a role for a renal biopsy in someone? Or some other types of testing,
maybe genetic? It is very important to make a diagnosis, for many reasons, not the least of which is for possible
prevention of renal damage in subsequent generations.
16. Your mention of possible barriers to the patient's care, including social and economic, is very touching and, in some
ways, sets you apart from many of your peers. I am very pleased that you included these comments in what you wrote.
One of the most underutilized services in the hospital is social work.
17. Usually, students are encouraged to include a little literature search for a relevant article to discuss in the PICO format
(for example). It goes under the category of EBM (Evidence-Based Medicine) and is a check-off in the EPA system. I
strongly suggest that you incorporate this into your write-ups.
I am glad that you worked out a way to attach the HandP to an email to send to me. That enables me to get comments
back to you most efficiently. While there is room for improvement in your work (as there is for everyone), I have no doubt
that you will build on the strengths evident in this HandP in subsequent efforts.
As for discussing in real time, I will be at the Clinical Challenge session tomorrow and we could do it then if you wish.
