
The growth and improvement evident in this fourth H&P are exciting!!! I have several laudatory comments and some
suggestions for further growth. They are:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you state up front who the informant is and his reliability.
2. It would be ideal to have a separate line for the chief complaint and its duration. It is clearly stated in the first sentence
of the HPI, but it is conventional, in an H&P document, to do this. Also, given the site of his injury, it might be helpful to
state his handedness in the identifying information, but, as this is not a neurological chief complaint it isn't truly needed.
3. The narrative of the HPI as you have constructed it is OUTSTANDING!!!. You included all the necessary information
and gave the chronologic evolution of the symptoms extremely well. Also, your writing is very lucid and articulate.
3a. It is excellent that you included the dog's vaccination history.
3b. It is excellent that you included pertinent negative, especially the absence of fever.
4. In the past history, your summary of the GERD story is superb. Perhaps, for a little more completeness, you might
mention if the symptoms are controlled by the treatment.
5. It is striking that a male would have a cholecystectomy at age 24. It might be useful to ask about possible inherited
factors, especially a hemoglobinopathy. Is he of Mediterranean ancestry (e.g., thalassemia) or could there be sickle cell
disease? (The latter seems unlikely, as he has no other history suggestive of sickle cell disease. But for an otherwise
healthy male to require a cholecystectomy at age 24 is, to me, striking.)
6. I am especially pleased with the way you gave the details of his smoking history.
7. In the social history, if it was practical (which may not have been the case on a first encounter), it might be useful to
know his risks for having gotten hepatitis C.
8. I am delighted that you included the ages of those mentioned in the family history, and the family history of other
things (hypertension and diabetes).
9. And I would be remiss if I did not compliment you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse". Bravissima!
10. Oh, yes, and I must compliment you for giving the manifestation of his allergy. It definitely had an impact on antibiotic
selection.
11. I commend you for giving the heart rhythm with the vital signs.
12. I commend you for taking the time to look in his ears!
13. (A little nit-picking: The phrase "regular rate and rhythm" is not really accurate. The rhythm can be regular; but the
rate is either rapid, slow, or normal. Most people don't really care about this, but it is your misfortune to have me as your
H&P advisor. Please remind me to tell you why this may matter, when I see you next Monday.)
14. If the chest is clear to auscultation, it is not necessary to report the absence of abnormal sounds. The word "clear"
implies this.
15. Especially in this patient, with active liver disease, it is important to report the actual liver size, not just that it is not
enlarges. And it would be more accurate to say that the spleen is not palpable, as a spleen can be enlarged but not yet
palpable.
16. One thing you have learned from this patient is that cellulitis of the hand can rapidly become a surgical emergency.
That is because the involvement of tendon sheaths (as is probably the case here) can rapidly be complicated by adhesions
within the tendon sheath, severely limiting range of motion. I had a patient about 30 years ago with a cat bite who had this
very complication, but rapid and aggressive management by a plastic surgeon saved her range of motion completely.
17. I personally would have obtained a culture of the drainage from his hand wounds on admission, plus a gram stain. A
major culprit in animal mouths is Pasteurella, which has specific antimicrobial susceptibility patterns. And, the way this one
evolved so rapidly, I'd be very suspicious of group A Strep.
18. With regard to his insurance issues interfering with treatment of his hepatitis C, I would want a social worker to be
involved very early.
19. In the Assessment and Plan section, it would be more complete to include the penicillin allergy as one of his
diagnoses. Hives make it serious.
Krystle, the growth in quality and sophistication of your H&Ps is, to me, truly impressive, indeed, exciting. I can hardly wait
to see your fifth one!
And thank you for getting it to me by Thursday morning.
I will attach a couple of articles about dog bites that you may want to take a look at.
Respectfully,
8/25/22, 12:10 PM Re: H&P 4

