
Having read your first H&P, I am ready to give you feedback. There are some strengths that I will mention, and also
several areas that I feel warrant efforts at improvement. Also, I ask that, starting with the next H&P, you send them to me
earlier in the week than Friday afternoon. I believe that the criterion from the Clerkship is Wednesday afternoon, but no
later than Thursday morning. My comments are as follows:
1. It is very important to identify clearly, at the beginning, who it is that provides the information in the H&P, which
conventionally is called the "informant".
2. In addition, it is very important to indicate the reliability of this person as an informant. This enables the reader to
apply the appropriate degree of skepticism in interpreting the information recorded. Common words for this include
"reliable" or, if the informant is not completely reliable, you might say what it is that makes them less than reliable. For
example, this might include a language barrier or difficulty remembering details.
3. It is very important to indicate, right up front, the duration of the chief complaint. This has a significant impact on the
differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint. For example, chest pain that has been going on for several weeks
implies something very different from chest paint that began two hours prior to admission.
4. The HPI should begin with the very first manifestations of the illness. Sometimes it is appropriate to begin with the
onset of the risk factor(s) that led to the present illness. In the instance of the patient in your H&P, who has severe COPD,
it would be perfectly appropriate to begin with the status of his health when be began to smoke cigarettes. You might say
"He was in apparent good health at age 18 when he began to smoke cigarettes. He continued to smoke, three packs per
day, until..." Then you would follow with the initial symptoms of the COPD itself, how it was managed, and how well it had
been controlled. You want to create a narrative of the present illness that shows how it evolved in this specific patient.
When done properly, the correct diagnosis can be made from the history alone in some 90% of instances.
5. You did create a narrative of the HPI that is pretty close to chronological, and this is a good thing. Illness evolves over
time, and it is a very good practice to write the narrative of the illness that reflects this chronologic evolution.
6. When giving a smoking history, it is most informative to state when it began, how much daily consumption there was,
and when it stopped (if it had stopped). The total pack years can then be given or you can let the reader do the math. But
just giving the total pack-years is not informative enough.
7. I ask, please, that you avoid certain words in reporting symptoms. These are "admit" "claim" and "deny" because we
don't accuse patients of having symptoms that they should have to admit to them or deny having them. You didn't use
"admit" but you did use "denied" multiple times. It is not a good practice, and I did include an article about this in the email
that I had sent to your whole clerkship group. There are neutral words you can use, such as "reports" or "does not
experience", among others. I will attach a slide set on the oral presentation that has slides the suggest alternative
language. Also, although you did not use it, the word "endorse" should not be used to indicate reporting of a symptom or
behavior. It can be very misleading and really does not reflect the actual meaning of the word "endorse". I commend you
for not using this word in your write-up.
8. Several things in your ROS and PMH are actually relevant to the HPI and need not be repeated in these sections.
You need only say, for example, "in addition to what is in the HPI..." and then give the other items.
9. Every admission H&P should have a section for Allergies/Intolerances and, in addition to listing the offending agent,
should state the type of reaction that the patient experiences. This is important because it indicates the severity of the
reaction and whether it is safe to use a related drug if necessary. For example, if someone has anaphylaxis to penicillin, it
might be advisable not to give that person a cephalosporin, because if they are among the percentage who cross-react,
the consequences could be too severe to risk.
9a. You did mention his allergy to vancomycin and you did state the type of reaction to it, for which I commend you.
But it is conventional to have a separate section for allergies and intolerances.
10. Every admission H&P should include a section for Family History, including parents, siblings, and children, alive or
dead, and their ages and whether they had an illness that might run in a family (or in the case of tuberculosis, that might be
spread within a household).
11. I commend you for including the doses of the medications that the patient takes.
12. In listing the vital signs, it is conventional to include a description of the cardiac rhythm in addition to the rate: Regular
or, if irregular, the pattern of the irregularity.
13. I commend you for noting the conjunctival pallor. Many people fail to mention this.
14. I understand that his extreme obesity made it difficult to examine his chest. Nonetheless, you can describe his breath
sounds as "distant", which is probably the case because of the substantial mass of skin between your stethoscope and his
lungs.
15. Please form the habit of percussing chests and abdomens.
9/16/22, 4:35 PM Re: H and P?
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/3
16. When there are abdominal striae (and I commend you for spelling this correctly), it is more complete to state whether
these are pigmented and whether they have telangiectasia. If they do, they might indicate hyperadrenalism. Generally,
non-pigmented striae suggest losses of weight.
17. It is appropriate to carry out at least a rudimentary neurological exam as part of an inpatient admitting note.
18. In describing edema, it is more complete to state how high up the lower extremity you can elicit pitting. (By the way, in
the physical you called it 2+ edema but in the Assessment and Plan you called it 3+. Try very hard not to contradict
yourself in the write-ups.
19. In the lab work, was an albumin part of the data? I saw total protein but not albumin. It is very hard to interpret serum
calcium without knowing the albumin.
20. For all patients, but especially those who are anemic, it is important to include the MCV and the RDW in the
hematology data. It is important to know if the patient's red cells are microcytic or macrocytic and whether there is a range
of red cell sizes (as indicated by the RDW).
21. Also, although it is very rarely done any more, it is a good practice to look at the peripheral blood smear under the
microscope, especially in anemic patients. Generally, the lab personnel are very welcoming when you want to do this.
22. In your Assessment and Plan you state that the iron deficiency anemia is iatrogenic, but you didn't make a statement
to justify this. Is it that he has had so much blood drawn? When you see iron deficiency, generally you should look for a
remediable source of blood loss. If this were my patient I would want to check every stool for occult blood, at the very
least. (There are people who can't absorb dietary iron, such as those with celiac disease and those who may have
duodenal Crohn's disease. But I would be very concerned that this patient has a GI source of blood loss and do what is
necessary to rule that out.
23. I agree that "currant jelly" sputum is seen in Klebsiella pneumoniae infection; but it is hardly "pathognomonic" for that
organism.
24. As for the increase WBC count, it is very minimal and not present in every specimen.
25. In the Assessment and Plan you mention RA (which I assume is rheumatoid arthritis) but you don't mention it in the
history and you don't mention any physical findings that are suggestive of this diagnosis. And no RA med is given in your
list of medications.
26. This patient is morbidly obese, and this is a legitimate diagnosis that should be included in the Assessment and Plan.
In addition, given his significant co-morbidities that are probably aggravated by his obesity, it might be reasonable to
suggest that he be considered for bariatric surgery. There are numerous criteria that have to be met, many of which he
meets. If he lost even 100 pounds he might feel substantially better.
I know that this seems like a lot of "stuff" but I made the suggestions because I believe them to be important.
Please try to incorporate them into your subsequent write-ups. I will see you in person at Monday's Clinical Challenge
session and am willing to go over these suggestions in real time with you. If you wish to do this, please tell your team that
you have to meet with me for at least 1/2 hour after the end of the session. They seldom last until 1:30 but, just in case,
tell them that you may not be back from the session until shortly after 2:00 pm.
I look forward to meeting you in person on Monday.
