,
As I did not see your H&P until late last night (it was submitted close to 10:00 pm), I am replying with my comments this
morning. It is my hope that your sixth H&P, next week, will come a little earlier in the day and in the week. Nonetheless,
this fifth write-up has many strengths, which I will mention, together with a few areas for improvement:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you indicate the informant and the informant's reliability right up front, enabling the reader to
apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is reported (which is always advisable). Even if the informant is
completely credible, it is important to seek adequate proof--or at least no internal contradictions--for what is reported.
2. Please try to form the practice of explicitly stating the chief complaint in a separate line before recording the narrative
of the history of present illness. This is very important, because the chief complaint--including its duration--is what
generates the initial differential diagnosis, upon which all of the information in the history of present illness is based. What
one asks to construct the history of present illness is determined, largely, by the chief complaint. It usually identifies the
system(s) involved in the present illness, enabling the physician to select things about which to ask to construct the history
of present illness.
3. It is EXCELLENT that you indicated that, at the onset of the present illness, the patient was in his "usual state of
health". It would be a little more complete to state, in general terms, what his "usual state of health" was (e.g., stable,
failing, apparently good). In his case, with other comorbidities, his "usual state of health" may not necessarily have been
"good".
4. Your construction of the HPI is EXCELLENT, beginning at the beginning of the HPI (and not the chief complaint) and
very chronological, with good attention to detail.
5. It is interesting that he knew his heart rate while he was out riding his bike. I guess he may have had a wrist monitor
of some sort.
6. Except for one use of "denied" in the last paragraph of the history of present illness, you did avoid the use of "admit"
"claim" "deny" and "endorse" in this H&P. That is to be commended.
7. Several items in the past medical history that you recorded are already in the history of present illness and need not
be repeated. As for the risk factors for coronary artery disease, such as hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and diabetes (and
even obstructive sleep apnea), many people (including me) would include these in a paragraph of the history of present
illness. The same is true for this patient's very significant family history of cardiovascular disease. The reason for this is
that when you obtain a history such as this, if it is before the patient's first episode, you can initiate preventive measures
that might spare this patient from suffering from inherited illnesses.
8. The PCIs mentioned in the past surgical history are really part of the history of present illness. If you put them there,
then you can simply say, "in addition to what is in the HPI,..." for the past surgical history.
9. Your rendering of the smoking history is EXCELLENT as it gives the real sequence of it. As it is a risk factor for
coronary artery disease, this is legitimately part of the history of present illness.
10. In the family history, it would be more complete to include the daughter's state of health.
11. I commend you for referring to the HPI in the ROS instead of repeating the items.
12. It is EXCELLENT that you included the body mass index with the vital signs.
13. As usual, your construction of the Assessment and Plan is EXCELLENT. You have really thought about what is going
on and what needs to be done. I am a little surprised that you didn't mention the rather low bicarbonate in the CMP. It
seems unlikely that it is related to ketoacidosis, as the glucose wasn't terribly high. It appears not to be related to
respiratory alkalosis, as the respiratory rate, while high (16) wasn't high enough to explain a low venous bicarbonate. It
might have been more complete to get at least a lactate level or maybe even a salicylate level just to make sure that
something important wasn't being missed.
14. The EBM article that you found is very relevant to this patient and was an excellent choice. It is clearly applicable to
the immediate and long-term management of this specific patient. Bravissima to you!
Krystle, this is a very, very strong H&P, reflecting excellent professional growth on your part. If you can turn in the sixth
one a little sooner than late Thursday evening it would be of help to me. I look forward to the excellence that you have
caused me to expect from your work as I await H&P number 6.
Have a good weekend.
