
This write-up is neither too long nor too broad. It represents the best work, by far, that you have to this point handed in.
My comments are below:
1. I commend you for giving the informant and the reliability of the information provided by the informant right up front.
This is very important because it enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism, if necessary to what is
reported.
2. I commend you for giving the duration of the chief complaint. (It may have been a little more complete to state in the
chief complaint more specifically the paint was, but leaving this out did not detract from the overall quality of the
information.
3. In this instance, it might have been more complete to start off with a brief statement of the patient's baseline health
status prior to the onset of the event of the chief complaint.
4. Your statement that the paint will "radiate to his front" is a little vague. The statement would be more informative if you
had included more specifically the area to which it radiated.
5. I assume that the 1000 mg of Tylenol that he received in the ED was intravenous, but it would be more informative if
you had included the route by which it was given.
6. The information in the second and third paragraphs of the HPI is very appropriately included in the HPI. I personally
would have put this information ahead of the information in the first paragraph, to maintain a more chronological narrative.
If you feel that his kidney stone is a consequence of the renal disease, then, as a narrative of the evolution of kidney
disease, the earlier events/history would belong at the beginning, with the events immediately leading to the hospitalization
following after these earlier events. However, you have written these first three paragraphs so fluently and so logically that
putting the information in the order that you did does not at all detract from the quality of the narrative.
7. Several items in the PMH are really integral parts of the HPI and you need only to say "see HPI".
8. Your use of the word "tumor" instead of "swelling" in describing his right knee and ankle is a little unusual. I am
somewhat of a Latinist myself, but not to this extent!
9. It is absolutely wonderful that, when the patient could not give you details of his medications, you inquired of the
pharmacy that dispensed them. Sometimes this information may make the difference between good and catastrophic
outcomes. Bravo to you!
10. I commend you for giving all of the details regarding the individuals in the FH, including their ages.
11. In the Social History, what you have included is excellent; but it would be more complete and very relevant to mention
his marital status, as you do mention that he has children.
12. In the ROS, what you have in MSK is really physical examination and not history. It is important to keep these
separate. The only things that can be both symptom and sign are fever and weakness. But your giving the quantification
of the motor strength and the description of the right great toe are really physical examination findings.
13. I commend you for describing the rhythm with the heart rate in the Vitals. Be aware that it is the rhythm that is regular,
not the rate. The rate is either rapid, normal, or slow. Many of your peers also write "RRR" without realizing what they are
saying. It may seem like nit-picking, but anything you can do to make your written records more unassailable is not trivial.
14. It is very commendable that you indicate that he appears his stated age.
15. In describing the absence of one of the incisors, it would be more complete to state if it was upper or lower and central
or lateral, left or right. Little details like that may have forensic significance sometimes.
16. I am delighted that you quantified the distension of the jugular vein. But 17 cm seems huge. From where were you
measuring. I have some slides about neck veins which I will attach to this email for your review if you wish to review them.
17. Your description of the heart murmur is excellent, absolutely excellent.
18. When an abdomen is distended, it is more informative to indicate whether the distension is from a solid, a liquid, or a
gas. This requires percussion and some manipulation of the patient to determine if there is a fluid wave and/or shifting
dullness, as well as a statement about the actual dimensions of the liver and, if palpable, the spleen. I am attaching some
slides about this part of the exam for your review if you wish to review them.
19. In describing edema, it is standard to state whether it is pitting edema or brawny edema. The two mean very different
things.
20. The lab data are astounding. It is amazing that he is ambulatory to the extent that he is.
21. It would be interesting to know if any crystals were noted in the urinary sediment.
22. The discussion of the differential diagnosis is excellent, very thoughtful and appropriately broad yet properly focused
(a rare and difficult act of reasoning to pull off!). If it is a kidney stone, it may well be uric acid, which might be difficult to
visualize on a CT without contrast, as these are radiolucent. Maybe a renal ultrasound would be a good first step to look
for a stone. The hematuria is certainly consistent with a stone; but is it possible that, for some reason, he has a renal
infarct? I think, as you do, that nephrolithiasis is the most likely diagnosis. But it has to be proven, and I personally would
6/13/2021 Re: H&P3
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/2
start with ultrasound. It might not be a bad idea to confer with the radiologist to see what the best diagnostic approach
might be.
23. I commend you for suggesting early involvement of Social Work in managing this patient.
24. Your discussion of the heart murmur and related symptoms is excellent.
25. I am very pleased that you want to work up the anemia for its cause. That is something that is not done enough these
days.
26. Your EBM comments and the selection of the article are very good and very relevant to this patient.
I believe that this excellent H&P reflects your real potential and it shows enormous improvement over the first two that
you submitted. I am eager to see your fourth H&P, as soon as you can submit it. This one was submitted after midnight
on a Friday night, and so I don't feel bad about not getting it back to you within 24 hours. Please send me the next one
sooner rather than later. And please send me an EPA for this one as soon as possible so that I can get that back to you in
a timely manner.
