
I have read your very interesting sixth H&P, which has many strengths (as you have conditioned me to expect). In addition
to pointing these out, I will have some constructive comments. These observations are as follows:
1. It is EXCELLENT that you have stated up front the informant and the informant's reliability. This is always useful, as it
lets the reader apply the appropriate degree of skepticism, if any, when reading the document.
2. Although you mention the duration of the chief complaint early in the body of the HPI, it is a convention to include it
together with the actual statement of the chief complaint. This is because the duration of the chief complaint often has a
significant impact on the differential diagnosis generated by the chief complaint. It would be very effective if you could
incorporate this into you routine practice.
3. It is always best to describe, briefly, what his "normal state of health" is. For example, was it a "normal state of
apparent good health"?
4. But I want to commend you for indicating that he was in his normal state of health at the onset of the current problem.
5. Your rendition of the HPI is extremely good, including all the important details for the current episode (which, really,
constitutes the HPI). There are some (including me) who would have included the details of his sexual history after noting
the HIV positivity, as, ultimately, although the HPI is an episode of thrush and probable candida esophagitis, it is really the
history of HIV disease which has now become symptomatic. The odds are that he acquired HIV at least 5 and as much as
10 years earlier.
6. Although he states he has not had "frequent" unprotected intercourse, you later note that he has three children with
three different women. He thus has a history of unprotected intercourse with several female partners. The interpretation
of "frequent" may vary; but his history puts him at significant risk of HIV exposure and for this reason it would be
appropriate to include this history in the HPI.
7. As I imply above, several items that you have included in the social history can reasonably be included in the HPI and
then you need only say "see HPI" in these parts of the social history.
8. It is EXCELLENT that you have given the ages of his parents. It would be more complete to do this for the brother
and the children.
9. I commend you for referring to the HPI several times in the ROS, rather than repeating these items.
10. The GI part of the ROS really is part of the HPI.
11. I note the heart rate of 79, which is a prime number. I assume that this came off a monitor. It is always very useful to
feel the pulses, which you do imply you did in your statement of the examination of the extremities.
12. It would be more desirable to describe what you saw in his throat, rather than just say "oral thrush". I don't doubt that
it was thrush, but that is really a diagnosis and not, to me, a physical finding. By describing a "cottage cheese-like
exudate" in the throat the reader can infer that it is thrush (which is probably why the ER got the HIV test in the first place,
as he had no real risk factors for oral thrush).
13. I assume that the blood glucose was slightly elevated because it is not a fasting sample.
14. In your Assessment and Plan for the fever, you say "viral infection". It is probable that the active viral infection is HIV
itself, although, depending on the CD4 count, something like CMV could be active also. While it is important to include
ruling out an active bacterial infection, that is not as high on my list of probable current problems.
15. You mention getting candida PCR. I'm not sure what this would add to the impression. You could to a microscopic on
the throat exudate looking for yeast, which would give instant gratification if it is positive (which it likely would be); but I
think the clinical picture is pretty clear. If you wanted to determine the extent of the candida infection, then blood cultures
and esophagoscopy would be reasonable. If this showed ulcers in the esophagus, they could be sampled, looking for
CMV.
16. I agree that early CD4 count and HIV viral load are of paramount importance in determining the stage of his HIV
infection and his risk for other, complicating infections.
17. I commend you for commenting on social determinants of health, which are critically important for this specific patient
(but are never unimportant for any patient).
18. I want to commend you for avoiding "admit" "claim" "deny" and "endorse" in this write-up.
19. And I want to thank you for getting it to me as promptly as Wednesday night. That uncomplicates my own work flow.
this write-up has many strengths and I am sure that your clinical acumen will continue to grow excellently, as it has
in the short span of six weeks. I wish you every possible success as you move forward.
Bruce Fisher, PGY-53
