
Data source: Patient, reliable
CC: Muscle ache, weakness, bloody vomit
History of Present Illness:
CG patient is a 23-year-old female with a history of atopic dermatitis and migraine presenting 
with a two-week history of pain in all four extremities accompanied by weakness. On roughly 
3/15, CG noticed an achy cramping pain that she first felt nocturnally in her bilateral thighs and 
calves accompanied by weakness and tingling. This sensation began happening during the day as 
well, when she noted that pain and weakness restricted her ability to bend at the knee. She found 
a rash at the base of her neck on Monday 3/22. She started experiencing cramping pain in her 
upper extremities accompanied by chills on Thursday 3/25, and noticed that she had difficulty 
combing her hair in the morning and unable to write her name legibly at work due to weakness 
of her hands. On Friday 3/26 her friend noted that she had a rash on her cheeks and nose. Later 
that day she experienced left sided chest pain, palpitations, and diaphoresis, which lasted about 
five minutes and resolved with drinking water and rest. She was at work when this happened, 
and experienced palpitations 1-2 more times since then, most recently on Sunday 3/28. On 
Saturday 3/27 she began to feel abdominal pain, localized to her right upper quadrant, 
accompanied by nausea and vomiting mucus with streaks of bright red blood. This feeling 
persisted with vomiting and diminished appetite until Sunday 3/28. 
She presented to the ED on Monday 3/29 with the chief complaint of RUQ pain & bloody emesis 
and was found to have rhabdomyolysis and transaminitis. She was given 4L bolus of lactated 
ringer, ondansetron, lorazepam, morphine, and ketorolac which resulted in a global reduction of 
her symptoms. At this time her pain has reduced and her ability to write legibly has returned, 
though she still feels pain in her thighs bilaterally when walking to the bathroom and sitting on 
the toilet. She has no recent history of trauma accidents, sick contacts, seizure, diarrhea, 
constipation, or dysuria. 
Past Medical History:
Atopic dermatitis, migraines, ovarian cysts. 
Past Surgical History:
None
Medications/Allergies:
Birth control, Tylenol PRN for pain. No supplements/other OTC medications. 
Peanuts & Shrimp  anaphylaxis; Latex rubber  rash 
Family History: 
Father (living): Stroke, HLD, gout, prediabetes
Mother (living): aneurysm, ovarian cysts, prediabetes
Sister has “thyroid problems” 
Social History:
Lives with parents, brother, and his girlfriend. 
Drinks 5+ mixed drinks on weekends, has “a few beers” (<4) “a few times during the week.”
CAGE score = 0
Started using nicotine puff pen last week, no prior history of cigarette use
Uses cannabis daily 
Does not use any other recreational drugs/IVDU
Left forearm tattoo two months ago, left upper arm tattoo one month ago, most recent tattoo on 
left forearm this past Friday. 
Review of Symptoms:
General: See HPI, otherwise no easy bruising or bleeding
HEENT: No visual changes, no eye discharge or pain. No changes in hearing or ear pain. 
Pulm: No shortness of breath, or new cough. 
Cardio: See HPI
GI: See HPI, no jaundice, hematochezia
GU: see HPI, no hematuria 
Neuro: See HPI. No balance issues 
MSK: See HPI
Skin: See HPI. ~6-month history of vertical striations that appear on flexor surface of arms and 
legs. Appear as excoriations, but no history of trauma to the area. 
Physical Exam:
Vitals: T: 98.3; HR 93 (76-93); BP 135/74 (112/63 – 138/85); RR 17 (17-19); SpO2 98% (96%-
98%). Forgot to record weight, but patient appears obese. 
General: Patient lying in bed, appearing older than her stated age, in no apparent distress. 
HEENT: Pupils equal, round and reactive to light with accommodation and extraocular 
movement intact. Neck is supple, with no JVD appreciated. 
Pulm: Clear to auscultation bilaterally with no rales or rhonchi
Cardio: regular rate and rhythm, S1 & S2 with no murmurs, rubs or gallops
Abdominal exam: Normoactive bowel sounds, soft and nontender/nondistended with no 
guarding or rigidity. – murphy sign
Extremities: No lower extremity edema bilaterally
Skin: Macular rash at anterior base of neck, entire face appears to also have macular rash, almost 
erythematous in appearance. Rash does not extend into scalp, back, or legs. 
MSK: Tenderness to palpation on trapezius by base of neck, SI joints and lower back paraspinal 
muscles, and left posterior arm muscle. 
Neuro: 4/5 strength on hand grip and shoulder abduction, remainder of strength exam is limited 
by pain. Pain is worst with flexion left hip. 
Labs: (ordered in ED)
Na: 137, K: 3.8, Cl: 103, CO2: 20.4, BUN: 3, Cr: 0.3 
AST: 184 / ALT:77 / AlkPhos: 60 / Bili: 0.6 / Prot: 6.3 / Alb: 3.3
CPK 4519 (before 4l bolus)
Troponin T: < 0.01
Imaging: (ordered in ED)
Chest 2 views (PA/LAT): Impression: within normal limits
EKG: normal sinus rhythm, no ST/T wave changes, normal axis and intervals. One pause in 
sinus rhythm seen
Abdominal RUQ US: Impression normal RUQ abdominal ultrasound
CT abdomen and pelvis w/o contrast: No evidence of acute intraabdominal pathology
UA: within normal limits
Assessment & Plan:
CG is a 23 y/o female with a two-week history of crampy extremity and abdominal pain, 
weakness, macular rash, and palpitations. Her signs symptoms and labs are most suggestive of 
inflammatory process including rhabdomyolysis. Her symptoms have subjectively improved 
since starting aggressive rehydration and pain control. 
1) Fatigue, muscle pain, weakness, emesis & rash
a. This is most likely due to an autoimmune inflammatory process, given the lack of 
trauma, strenuous physical activity, or new pharmacology. Differential is broad, 
and includes dermatomyositis, SLE, polymyositis, polymyalgia rheumatica, HIV 
inflammatory myopathy, thyroid disease, fibromyalgia, inclusion body myositis. 
b. Dermatomyositis is currently most likely on the differential because of skin 
findings and elevated CPK. The facial malar rash is closer to a heliotrope 
eruption, as it does not spare the nasolabial fold as would be expected in SLE. 
The further rash on her neck may be poikiloderma V-sign. CPK elevation, and 
even transaminitis could be explained by muscle fiber breakdown. Diagnosis of 
dermatomyositis is not supported by the patient’s history of hand weakness and 
physical exam showing reduced grip strength. Typically, one would expect 
proximal muscle involvement over distal muscle involvement in both 
dermatomyositis and polymyositis. Dermatomyositis may include bloody emesis, 
though that is generally because of GI vasculitis, and CG did not experience 
bloody stool, or coffee ground emesis. Her vomit was contained mucus with 
streaks of bright red blood, probably indicating that the blood is from esophageal 
irritation. 
c. SLE is less likely because though weakness is common, true myositis is 
uncommon finding. Because it is still present in 7-15% of patients with SLE, and 
because I had difficulty determining if nasolabial fold is involved in malar rash, it 
remains high on the differential. Her history of migraines may also be a 
manifestation of SLE headaches. 
d. Plan: antibody testing for ANA (present in up to 60% of patients with DM/PM, + 
result is not diagnostic), anti-dsDNA (seen in up to 70% of patients with SLE, 
highly specific), anti-smith (seen in 30% of patients with SLE, highly specific), 
anti-Jo (found in 20-30% of patients with PM), anti-Mi2 (associated with early 
DM, V sign like in our patient)
e. ESR, CRP for general picture of inflammation, expected to be elevated. 
f. MRI/CT to look for most inflamed muscle groups. Expect to see bilateral 
involvement in DM. Most inflamed muscle will be good target for bx 
g. Continue rehydration @150cc/hr and pain management with morphine and 
acetaminophen PRN. 
h. Plan to biopsy to look for perimysial lymphocytic infiltration  diagnostic of 
dermatomyositis. Polymyositis would show endomysial lymphocytic infiltration. 
2) Rhabdomyolysis 
a. Most likely secondary to underlying inflammatory condition. No trauma, new 
medication, seizure, etc. identified as cause in history. 
b. No hematuria/myoglobinuria 
c. Monitor kidney function for damage  trend CMP every day
d. Continue lactated ringer @ 150 CC/hr
3) Transaminitis 
a. Negative murphy’s sign, RUQ ultrasound makes hepatitis unlikely 
b. Most likely cause is muscle damage, but patient also has recent history of 
increased alcohol consumption. AST>ALT pattern supports alcoholic hepatitis. 
Patient is also obese – etiology of transaminases is likely multifactorial. 
4) Palpitations 
a. Nonfocal EKG and undetectable troponins make MI unlikely, especially 
considering that palpitations first started days before troponins were measured. 
b. If palpitations return, follow up for cardiac stress testing
5) Alcohol use disorder
a. Counseled patient on new increased alcohol use. Though scored a 0 on CAGE 
screening, she does binge drink at least 1x/week. 
6) Obesity 
a. Patient has family history of prediabetes on both sides and is obese. Should she 
have a auto immune disorder she will likely require steroids occasionally. It 
would be wise to get an HbA1c at this point to assess her risk of developing 
diabetes, and to counsel on weight loss. 
Fluids: i.v. LR@150ml.hr
Electrolytes: stable now, replete as needed
Nutrition: normal diet
Anticoagulation: Not indicated, patient is ambulating every few hours
Code status: full code 