
As I mentioned in my recent text message to you, this H&P is absolutely EXCELLENT!!!!!!! It shows so many strengths. I
will have several comments, many of them laudatory to reinforce the excellent aspects of the write-up; and I will have a few
constructive suggestions. My comments are as follows:
1. It is excellent that you indicate the informant(s) clearly right up front.
2. It is a good practice to include, with the informant(s), a statement of their reliability and, if less than reliable, the reason
for this. This is a good practice because it enables the reader to apply the appropriate degree of skepticism to what is
reported. As physicians, we want to be sure that everything upon which rely for decision making can be verified.
3. I commend you for including the duration of the chief complaint. This has a significant impact on the differential
diagnosis generated by the chief complaint.
4. Your rendition of the history of present illness is truly outstanding. It is chronological, which is extremely important,
and you have not wasted a single word. Thoroughness with conciseness is a goal that is very difficult to achieve, and yet
you have done this with your first H&P!
5. You have intermingled "ago" with "prior to admission". I personally prefer "prior to admission" because that allows the
narrative to be clearly understood by the reader regardless of how long after the events the document is read. (Also,
published case reports never say "ago".) In an office visit you could say "prior to the current visit". (But this is a relatively
small point. Your misfortune is having me, with my quirks, for your H&P advisor.)
6. Because of its relevance to the events in the present illness, it would have been appropriate to include the dose of
marijuana in the HPI. It would also be more complete to include the presence or absence of alcohol consumption and, if
present, its timing relative to the events of the HPI, in the HPI. This is because, with pancreatitis in the differential
diagnosis based on the history, alcohol can be an important factor.
7. A few things in the ROS are appropriate to put in this HPI and then need not be repeated in the ROS. You need only
say "see HPI; plus..."
8. In the family history, it is always good to include the ages of those mentioned, and whether they are living or dead. I
commend you for mentioning children and siblings (which many of your peers omit).
9. Because you describe the patient as "thin-appearing" it would be useful to include the BMI in the vital signs, as many
of your peers do. Also, if she is "thin-appearing" it would be useful to know whether she appears cachectic (which my
generation called "wasted") One place to look for this is the temples. Temporal wasting is an important sign of unhealthy
weight loss.
10. It is interesting that, with the high bilirubin that you mention near the end of the write-up, you did not perceive
jaundice. It is usually visible when the bilirubin is over 3. It is best to look for this with daylight. In fact, there is a joke:
"What is the best place to look for jaundice? The parking lot." (Because that has daylight. Most of the indoor lighting in
hospitals makes things have a yellowish tinge.)
I want to share with you something that I learned as a senior medical student in January 1970, from one of the great
clinicians of the time. Jaundice comes in three shades, based on the underlying cause: Yellow (hemolytic), Orange
(hepatocellular) and Green (obstructive). If the bilirubin is 7 or greater this is pretty easy to see, if you use natural daylight
for the exam.
11. I am delighted that you measured the total liver span!!! The only thing that would make your report even more
complete would be to state how far below the right costal margin it extended.
12. Although you mentioned the bilirubin later in your note, it would have been helpful to include it with the lab data, and
also to include both direct and indirect. Also, it would be useful, in this case, to include the urinalysis with the lab data. If
there is bilirubinuria, then you know that at least some of the elevated bilirubin is conjugated, since unconjugated bilirubin
is not water-soluble. If the jaundice is purely from hemolysis, bilirubin does not usually appear in the urine unless there
has been a fair amount of time for it to become conjugated and the total is pretty high. Also, the urine urobilinogen is
important. If it is absent, that suggests total obstruction of the common bile duct, as urobilinogen (and bile) can't get into
the bowel, where the urobilinogen is reabsorbed.
13. Your assessment and plan are extremely well constructed and expressed.
14. And I would be remiss if I did not compliment you for avoiding my annoying words: "admit" "claim" "deny" and
"endorse". Bravissima!
Emma, even if this were not your first H&P I would say it is excellent. How much more strongly must I compliment you for
such an excellent first effort?! Given the extenuating circumstances that you have experienced this week, I am not worried
about EBM, although if you want to send me a paragraph with this, I won't stop you. I appreciate that you got it to me as
2/19/23, 2:54 PM H&P 1
https://mail.aol.com/webmail-std/en-us/PrintMessage 2/5
soon as you did, giving me plenty of time to review it before the beginning of the new week. I look forward eagerly to your
next H&P and to meeting you in person tomorrow.
With great respect,
